The Project Gutenberg EBook of USDA Farmers' Bulletin No. 1142: Growing
Crimson Clover, by Leonard Wheeler Kephart

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: USDA Farmers' Bulletin No. 1142: Growing Crimson Clover

Author: Leonard Wheeler Kephart

Release Date: September 10, 2020 [EBook #63166]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK USDA FARMERS' BULLETIN NO. 1142 ***




Produced by Tom Cosmas from files generously made available
by USDA through The Internet Archive. All resultant
materials are placed in the Public Domain.










Transcriber Note

Text emphasis denoted as _Italics_ and =Bold=.




                          FARMERS' BULLETIN 1142

                 UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE


                                 GROWING

                                 CRIMSON

                                  CLOVER


Crimson Clover is a handsome fall-planted annual, widely cultivated in
the Middle Atlantic and Southeastern States for forage, a cover crop, and
green manure.

Crimson clover is commonly sown in corn at the last cultivation. If the
soil is heavy, a better practice is to sow after a crop of small grain or
on other land which can be specially prepared.

Crimson clover will grow on poorer soil than most clovers and is not
particularly dependent upon lime. For this reason it has been widely used
for restoring the productivity of soils which have been abused. A more
important function is to maintain crop yields on soils which are already
moderately rich.

The most common difficulty in growing crimson clover is the killing of the
young stands by drought. This is best prevented by the preparation of a
fine, moist, and firmly compacted seed bed.

August and September are the best months for sowing crimson clover, the
exact date depending upon the condition of the soil. Either hulled or
unhulled seed may be used, the latter giving somewhat greater certainty of
a stand.

Crimson clover is often sown with a nurse crop of buckwheat or cowpeas, to
protect it from the sun. A light covering of straw is also effective.

Combinations of crimson clover with oats, hairy vetch, or other fall-sown
forage crops give somewhat higher yields and a surer stand than crimson
clover alone.

No insects trouble crimson clover seriously, and the only severe disease
is the stem-rot, or wilt.

              Contribution from the Bureau of Plant Industry
                           WM. A. TAYLOR, Chief
                      Washington, D. C. August, 1920




                       =GROWING CRIMSON CLOVER.=[1]


                  L. W. Kephart, _Scientific Assistant,
                  Office of Forage-Crop Investigations._

[1] This bulletin is a revision of Farmers' Bulletin 550, entitled
"Crimson Clover: Growing the Crop," by J. M. Westgate, formerly Agronomist
in Charge of Clover Investigations, Office of Forage-Crop Investigations.
The illustrations and some of the subject matter of the old bulletin are
retained in the present issue.




=CONTENTS.=

                                                 Page.

  History and adaptations                           4
  Varieties                                         5
  Use in the rotation                               6
    Seeding in intertilled crops                    6
    Seeding after an early-maturing crop            7
  Requirements for obtaining a stand                8
    Soils                                           9
    Preparation of the seed bed                    10
    Fertilizers                                    11
    Lime                                           12
    Inoculation                                    13
  Seeding                                          13
    Time of seeding                                13
    Rate of seeding                                14
    Methods of seeding                             14
    Choice of seed                                 16
    Unhulled seed                                  16
    Use of a nurse crop                            17
    Seed mixtures                                  18
  Treatment of the stand                           20
  Maladies                                         20


[dropcap: CRIMSON] CLOVER is an annual or winter annual true clover,
resembling common red clover in size and general appearance, the most
noticeable difference being the flower heads, which are long, narrow, and
pointed instead of short, spherical, and compact (fig. 1). The individual
flowers of this clover are commonly of a rich scarlet color, and as the
heads are borne mostly on the ends of the stems, a field of crimson clover
in full bloom presents a strikingly brilliant appearance. Because of the
color of the flowers, crimson clover is often termed "scarlet clover,"
although it is also known, less commonly, as "French clover," "Italian
clover," "German clover," "incarnate clover," and "annual clover." It is
the only annual true clover that is of more than incidental agricultural
importance in the eastern United States.

Probably the most important characteristic of crimson clover is its
ability to grow and make its crop during the fall and early spring,
when the land is not occupied by the ordinary summer-grown crops. In
sections where it succeeds, it can be sown following a grain crop or in
an intertilled crop in late summer and is ready to harvest for hay, to
pasture, or to turn under as green manure in time to plow the land for
spring-seeded crops, such as corn or cotton. South of central Delaware
it may even be cut for seed and the stubble plowed under in time for
seeding a quick-maturing strain of corn. Because it can be grown during
the offseason of the year, crimson clover is one of the most economical
legumes for green manuring, and it has been largely used for that purpose
in the regions to which it is adapted. The many uses to which this crop
may be put merit a careful study of the best methods of establishing a
stand of this clover on the farm.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.--A single plant of crimson clover.]




=HISTORY AND ADAPTATIONS.=


Crimson clover is a native of Europe, where it is cultivated as a forage
and green-manuring crop in Italy, France, Spain, Germany, Austria, and
Great Britain. Large quantities of crimson-clover seed are exported from
Europe to the United States, especially from the districts of central
France, where crimson clover is the premier leguminous forage plant.

Crimson clover was introduced into this country as early as 1818, and the
seed was widely distributed by the United States Patent Office in 1855.
The plant was at first regarded more for its ornamental value than as a
forage plant, however, and it was not until about 1880 that its value for
agricultural purposes began to be appreciated.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.--Map of a part of the United States, showing the
region where crimson clover is most widely grown.]

At present crimson clover is grown most widely in the lighter sandy
areas of the Atlantic Coastal Plain, where the soil is not very rich
and the winters are not severe. (Fig. 2.) The plant does not withstand
either extreme cold or extreme heat, and its culture is therefore limited
to regions which enjoy at some time during the year a long period of
relatively mild, moist weather. Ordinarily, this clover does not survive
the winter in latitudes north of southern Pennsylvania, while in some of
the Southern States it is frequently killed by dry, hot weather in the
fall or spring. It succeeds well in the humid regions near the Gulf of
Mexico and in the Pacific Northwest, but in these areas it is not widely
grown.

Normally, crimson clover is a winter annual comparable to winter wheat;
that is, it is planted in the fall, lies more or less dormant over winter,
grows rapidly in the spring, and dies, after going to seed, early in the
summer. Where the summers are not too hot it can be planted in the spring
and grown as a summer crop, but for this purpose other clovers are usually
preferred.




=VARIETIES.=


Crimson clover is exceedingly variable both in color of flower and in
time of maturity. These variations are particularly noticeable in fields
planted from a mixed lot of seed, the flowers presenting a range in color
from nearly pure white to a deep purplish red and the seeds a difference
in date of ripening of more than a month. Since crimson clover is thought
to be mainly self-pollinated, it is easy to fix these qualities by
selection and to establish definite varieties.

In Europe six or seven different varieties of crimson clover are
recognized and sold by seedsmen, varying from extra early crimson flowered
to, extra late white flowered and from very hardy to non-hardy. By the use
of a succession of these varieties the European farmer is able to spread
his harvest over six or seven weeks instead of having it concentrated
within a few days, as in America. Similarly, the culture of the plant has
been extended northward from Italy to Sweden by means of hardy strains.
A wild form of crimson clover having yellowish flowers and hairy foliage
occurs in southern and eastern Europe and in England, but it is not of
economic value.

In America no sharply defined varieties of crimson clover are recognized,
except a white-blooming variety which is sold in the South and is two
weeks later than the ordinary crimson-flowered sort. Hardy strains have
been developed and used in a small way in Massachusetts and Ohio, but
these are not commercially available.




=USE IN THE ROTATION.=


=SEEDING IN INTERTILLED CROPS.=

In former years a large percentage of the crimson-clover acreage was
seeded in corn or other intertilled crops at or shortly after the time of
the last cultivation. In most of the crimson-clover area it is possible
to make such a seeding, obtain a good growth during the fall and early
spring, and mow or plow under the clover in time, for breaking up the land
for another crop of corn. This has been the standard method of growing
this clover, and it is still the leading practice in many of the older
sections. Corn in the summer with crimson clover in the winter is a cheap
and convenient method of growing a cash crop and a restorative crop the
same year, and the reputation of crimson clover as a crop increaser is
largely based on this simple rotation. Instances are by no means rare
where the yield of corn has been gradually increased from 10 bushels per
acre to as high as 70 bushels by this means.

The difficulty with this method is the possibility of the stand of young
clover failing through drought. The growing corn makes a heavy demand on
the soil moisture, and if there is not enough moisture for both clover and
corn the latter gets the larger share and the tender clover plants are
likely to succumb. Because of the risk involved, farmers in the upland
sections are seeking other and more reliable methods of seeding, and the
sowing of crimson clover in corn is gradually decreasing.

Where the danger from fall drought is not serious, crimson clover may be
sown in corn at the time of the last cultivation or when the corn leaves
have just begun to wither. South of central Virginia there is likely to be
much hot weather after the corn is laid by, in which case it is best to
delay the seeding of the clover until after the first rain. The appearance
of a field of crimson clover seeded in corn the previous summer is shown
in figure 3.

South of southern Virginia crimson clover can be seeded in cotton,
provided the field is free from crab-grass and other weeds and the soil is
not too dry. In the extreme north of the cotton belt the seed may be sown
at the last working of the cotton; farther south this occurs too early and
it is necessary to wait for a rain, which often comes at about the time of
the first picking.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.--Crimson clover in an old cornfield. The clover
was seeded in the corn at the last cultivation. A fodder stack is to be
observed in the middle foreground. The cornstalks have been removed to
avoid difficulty in mowing the clover.]

Crimson clover may be seeded in practically any of the cultivated truck
crops which receive their last cultivation from 8 to 12 weeks before
the first frost. It is not practicable to seed the clover in late
potatoes, sweet potatoes, or other root crops, as the digging in the fall
practically destroys the clover.

Ordinarily, crimson clover does not succeed when sown in cowpeas, sorghum,
or watermelons, owing to the heavy shade cast by these crops. It can,
however, be seeded in tobacco, tomatoes, cultivated soy beans, and
cantaloupes.


=SEEDING AFTER AN EARLY-MATURING CROP.=

Seeding crimson clover in an intertilled crop is successful mostly on
sandy soils, which can easily be prepared for seeding even in mid-summer.
On clay soils and in weedy fields this method of seeding is likely to be
unsatisfactory. Such soils are usually hard and dry in August and can with
difficulty be brought into condition for a seed bed, with the result that
a large percentage of such seedings fail. A better plan on clay soils, and
on sandy soils in many cases, is to seed the crimson clover on specially
prepared ground from which all other crops have been removed. Such ground
can be made as fine and firm as desired. Furthermore, the clover after
planting does not have to compete with another crop for the soil moisture.
This method is somewhat more troublesome than planting in intertilled
crops, but the greater certainty of getting a stand more than offsets the
greater cost. Planting crimson clover on specially prepared ground has
extended the culture of the plant to regions where it was not hitherto
grown and is increasing the reliability of the crop in sections where it
has been long established.

In the ordinary rotation, crimson clover follows a crop of small grain.
However, it may follow any crop that is removed 8 to 10 weeks before
frost, or it may be seeded on fallow ground. Ground from which early
potatoes have been removed is especially favorable for the establishment
of a stand of this clover. The residual effect of the fertilizers used on
potatoes is partially responsible for this, while the well-settled seed
bed, which requires only leveling and harrowing, also presents favorable
conditions for the crimson-clover seedlings.

In many parts of the South crimson clover can be seeded in corn stubble if
an early variety of corn has been used. Although there is some risk that
the clover may not make enough growth before winter if seeding is delayed
until the corn is harvested, the danger of losing the stand is not as
great as if the clover were seeded earlier, while the corn was standing.

Crimson clover is sometimes seeded after a grass or clover crop if the
rainfall in July is sufficient to cause the sod to decay. In the far South
it can be planted after peanuts, while in all sections it can be sown as
a catch crop on land where cotton or other crops have died early in the
season.




=REQUIREMENTS FOR OBTAINING A STAND.=


Probably the difficulty most commonly experienced in growing crimson
clover is failure to obtain a satisfactory stand. Sometimes the seed does
not germinate well; more commonly good germination is secured, but the
seedlings wither and die before they can become established. Frequently
not more than 50 per cent of the plants survive the first three weeks,
while a complete failure of the crop is a common risk even in the sections
where crimson clover is most widely grown.

The most common cause of failure to obtain a stand is hot, dry
weather after planting. The seedlings of crimson clover are tender,
succulent, and shallow rooted and are easily killed by lack of moisture.
Unfortunately, in most of the crimson-clover area the weather during late
August and early September is very likely to be hot and droughty, making
the planting of the clover at that time rather hazardous. Some farmers
attempt to avoid this difficulty by planting either in early summer or in
October, after the fall rains; there is danger, however, that the plants
will make too much or too little growth to survive the winter. In the
long run it is probably better to plant at the regular time and depend
upon thorough preparation of the seed bed to offset any deficiency in the
rainfall.


=SOILS.=

Crimson clover can be grown successfully on almost any type of soil if it
is reasonably rich, well drained, and supplied with organic matter and the
proper inoculating bacteria. Probably two-thirds of the crimson-clover
acreage is found on the sandy soils of the Atlantic Coastal Plain, but
the crop is not necessarily restricted to sandy soils and is in fact
increasing in importance on the red-clay soils of the Piedmont region and
in the limestone valleys of Virginia and Tennessee.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.--a crimson-clover failure on ground too poor in
humus.]

Crimson clover has been an important factor in increasing yields on soils
that have been abused, but it is not a crop for land which is naturally
very poor. It does not do well on rough, newly cleared areas, raw
subsoil, Hard, dry clay, or sterile sand. (Fig. 4.) For such soils soy
beans, cowpeas, and velvet beans are better suited and should be used for
the first three or four years until crimson clover can be successfully
grown. Crimson clover can be made to grow on poor soils, provided they
are specially prepared by liming, manuring, and inoculating. In general,
however, crimson clover is a crop for maintaining soils which are already
fairly productive rather than one for inducing productivity in soils where
it is quite lacking. If there is any doubt whether the soil is suitable
for crimson clover, a small plat should be prepared under field conditions
and planted one year for trial.


=PREPARATION OF THE SEED BED.=

To secure a full, even stand of crimson clover with any degree of
regularity the seed bed should be well and thoroughly prepared. The soil
should be firm, moist, well settled, and fine on top. Only indifferent
success can possibly be expected if the seed is scattered on land which
is loose, dry, and full of hard lumps and trash. A loose seed bed dries
out quickly, heaves during the winter, and on some soils blows and washes
badly.

[Illustration: Fig. 5.--A corrugated roller or pulverizer, an excellent
implement for preparing the seed bed for crimson clover.]

On the other hand, the seed bed should not be too hard, for although this
clover often grows successfully on soil which would be too solid for
corn, there must be at| least enough loose soil on the surface to cover
the seed. Thorough preparation is the very best insurance against failure
of the stand through drought or winterkilling, and the most successful
growers sow crimson clover on land as well prepared as that for wheat.

To secure a fine, firm seed bed without drying out the surface soil, the
land should be prepared with as few operations as possible. A single
working when the soil is in a moist, crumbly condition is better than half
a dozen workings when the soil is too wet or too dry. In very sandy soils,
or soils which do not form a crust, the only preparation needed is to keep
down the weeds.

An excellent tool for making the seed bed is the corrugated roller or
pulverizer (fig. 5). This implement is an improvement over the old plain
roller for breaking clods and is unexcelled for keeping the surface soil
moist. It can be used after plowing and again before planting, and even
after planting if the soil needs to be compacted. Rolling of some kind to
firm the soil is especially important on sandy soils, but it is equally
beneficial on clay soils if they are cloddy.

When clover is seeded in an intertilled crop, such as corn, cotton, or
tomatoes, the customary cultivation received by these crops is ordinarily
sufficient preparation for crimson clover. In sandy soil the clover is
often seeded without any immediate preparation, but a light stirring with
a harrow-toothed cultivator is desirable if the ground is hard. If the
clover is to be used for hay or seed, the preceding crop should be laid by
level rather than in ridges. This will facilitate cutting the clover.

Where crimson clover is seeded after a crop of small grain, the stubble
should be plowed or disked as soon as possible after the grain is cut.
Stubble land dries out quickly, partly because the soil is suddenly left
bare and partly because of the drain on the soil moisture by the crops of
ragweed and other coarse-growing weeds which always follow a grain crop.
Unless the soil is cultivated at once it becomes very difficult to obtain
anything like an ideal seed bed for crimson clover. This difficulty is
usually more pronounced after oats and barley than after rye and wheat.
Ordinarily the best practice is to disk the grain stubble within a week
after harvest and harrow every week, or at least after every rain, in
order to settle the ground, destroy the weeds, and assist in holding the
moisture pending the time of seeding the clover. Plowing the stubble
is more expensive than disking and requires that the ground be allowed
to settle for a month or six weeks in order to secure a firm seed bed.
Plowing is an advantage in a wet season, because plowed ground dries
readily; it is a disadvantage in a dry season for the same reason.


=FERTILIZERS.=

On moderately rich soil the fertilizer applied to the preceding crop is
sufficient to produce a good crop of crimson clover. This is especially
true where the clover follows such crops as potatoes or tomatoes, which
ordinarily are heavily treated with fertilizers. It is important to
realize, however, that crimson clover has a very short period of growth,
and that to make a vigorous growth it must have a good supply of plant
food. On sandy soils where fertilizers have not recently been applied it
is often the practice to apply from 150 to 200 pounds of acid phosphate,
with some potash fertilizer if it can be afforded. On clay soils 200 or
300 pounds per acre of acid phosphate ordinarily are sufficient. On many
soils a light application of nitrate of soda will assist materially in
giving the young clover plants a good start and often will enable them to
withstand the effects of a late drought or severe winter which otherwise
might have injured the stand. If the seeding has been delayed, as by
waiting for suitable rains, an application of not more than 75 pounds of
nitrate of soda per acre will stimulate the young plants and enable them
to make a better growth before winter.

Fertilizer is usually applied at seeding time, but a few farmers have been
found who apply it as a top-dressing very early the following summer,
giving as a reason that there is then no loss from winter leaching and
that by this method the plants are nourished at the time they are making
their most vigorous growth. Such top-dressings of fertilizer should not
be made while the leaves are wet with rain or dew. Where stable manure is
applied to crimson clover very marked results follow. It may be spread
just before seeding when the clover is not grown in an intertilled crop,
or it may be applied as a top-dressing in winter or very early spring.

The more vigorous the growth that can be induced by the application of
suitable fertilizers the more marked will be the increase in the yield of
the succeeding crops. On soil in a low state of productivity the use of
a reasonable amount of fertilizer will often enable a successful crop of
clover and succeeding crops to be produced, where had not the fertilizers
been applied the clover would have failed. Furthermore, the following
crop, particularly if it be corn, would also fail to give the increased
yield which follows a successful stand of crimson clover.

An application of barnyard manure will be found to be especially effective
in obtaining a stand of crimson clover on any thin, galled spots in the
field. The manure should be worked into the ground before seeding, and,
if possible, a second application as a top-dressing should be given a day
or two after planting. The top-dressing stimulates the seedlings and if
strawy helps to protect them from the August sun.


=LIME.=

Crimson clover is not as dependent on lime as red clover and alfalfa,
being more like alsike clover in this respect. It does not thrive on soils
which are very "sour," but on well-drained soils in a productive condition
crimson clover frequently makes a vigorous growth, even though the soil
may show a high lime requirement. The stands are usually more uniformly
good over the limed parts of such fields than on the unlimed parts,
although it is sometimes questionable whether the benefit derived from
liming is profitable. Liming is more often desirable on clay soils than
on sandy soils, and usually gives better results when used in conjunction
with fertilizers than when used alone. On light sandy soils deficient
in humus burnt lime may be actually injurious. In considering the
advisability of applying lime one must not lose sight of the need of lime
on the part of such other crops as corn, cantaloupes, or peaches, which
are either grown with or follow the clover. Inasmuch as the effect of
liming varies greatly in different localities, it is suggested that small
plats be treated experimentally at different rates before any considerable
areas are limed.


=INOCULATION.=

A large part of the value of all clovers lies in their ability to utilize
the nitrogen of the air and add it to the soil. When grown on rich land,
the clovers, like many other plants, use the nitrogen already present in
the soil and are not stimulated to contribute any to their own support or
to the support of other crops. To enable the clover to use the nitrogen in
the air the presence of the proper nodule-forming bacteria in the soil is
necessary.

Fortunately, most of the soils in the crimson-clover sections appear to
be already inoculated, and artificial inoculation is not often necessary,
except on soils new to the crop. Crimson clover is inoculated by the same
strain of bacteria which occurs on the roots of the other true clovers;
consequently, a field which has produced a good stand of red, mammoth,
alsike, white, hop, Carolina, rabbit's-foot, or buffalo clover is usually
inoculated sufficiently for crimson clover. Sweet clover, Japan clover,
and bur clover are not true clovers and are inoculated by a different
strain of bacteria.

The importance of inoculation is well shown by an experiment conducted by
the Alabama Agricultural Experiment Station. In this experiment yields of
4,057 and 6,100 pounds of crimson-clover hay were secured on inoculated
soils, while on corresponding areas which were not inoculated the yields
were 761 pounds on one area and nothing on the other.

The soil can be inoculated artificially by means of pure cultures of the
bacteria or by the transfer of a small quantity of soil from another
clover field.[2] The latter method is the more certain, but is open to
the danger of introducing noxious weeds, insects, and plant diseases,
especially if the soil is brought from a distance. The presence of
stem-rot in many sections makes the use of soil especially dangerous. This
disease can, be carried with the soil from field to field.

[2] Sufficient pure culture for inoculating seed for 1 acre can be secured
free from the United States Department of Agriculture. Full directions for
using the culture accompany each bottle. Directions for inoculating by the
soil-transfer method can also be obtained from this Department.




=SEEDING.=


=TIME OF SEEDING.=

Crimson clover is usually sown between August 15 and October 1, the
general rule being to plant about 60 days before the first killing frost
is expected. South of Virginia crimson clover can be seeded as late as
November 1, although if planted late more seed should be used and a light
dressing of nitrate of soda applied, in order to stimulate the young
plants. Seeding earlier than August 1 is seldom advisable unless the crop
is sown with some other crop the shade of which will hold it back.

The exact date of planting depends almost entirely upon the moisture
content of the soil. The principal condition to avoid is planting when the
soil contains just enough moisture to germinate the seeds, but not enough
to keep the plants growing. Usually it is better to plant when the soil is
quite dry than when it is slightly moist, for in dry soil the seeds, if
properly buried, lie without germinating and are ready to grow vigorously
at the first rainfall. The most favorable time for seeding is just before
or just after a good rain, when the soil is moist enough to form a ball in
the hand.


=RATE OF SEEDING.=

The ordinary rate of seeding crimson clover is 15 pounds per acre,
although the rate varies according to conditions. From 12 to 15 pounds per
acre are usually sufficient when growing the crop for seed or when the
soil is unusually rich. On poor soil, dry soil, or on soil which has not
previously produced crimson clover 18 to 22 pounds of seed give better
assurance of a stand. Heavy seeding is also desirable when planting late
in the season or when a heavy crop is wanted for green manure early in the
spring.

Theoretically, 2 pounds of seed per acre would provide six plants
for every square foot, which is a satisfactory stand. Under ordinary
circumstances, however, it is necessary to allow for some of the seed
being too deep, or too shallow, or failing to germinate, and for a certain
percentage of winterkilling. It is also well to have a fairly thick stand
of the young plants, so that the ground may be well covered during the
early fall and thus prevent soil washing and the growth of winter weeds.


=METHODS OF SEEDING.=

The most common method of seeding crimson clover in intertilled crops
is to scatter the seed broadcast with a rotary seeder or by hand. (Fig.
6.) In order to place the seed on a fresh, moist seed bed it is commonly
broadcasted immediately behind the cultivator at the last cultivation and
is covered 'at once by a second cultivator. In tall corn the seed may be
sown from horseback, the ears of the horse being covered with small bags
to prevent the entrance of the flying seed. Slightly more seed is required
when seeding in tall corn, as some seed catches in the corn plants. When
seeding in cotton care must be taken to avoid injury to the opening bolls,
which are easily knocked off or torn. This is best done by seeding by
hand, covering the seed with a piece of brush dragged down the rows.

In low-growing truck crops and on fallow ground crimson clover can be
seeded with a wheelbarrow seeder. This implement distributes the seed more
evenly than can be done by hand or with the rotary seeder, especially
when planting a mixture of crops. The wheelbarrow seeder being somewhat
awkward to handle is better adapted to smooth, level fields than to
hillsides.

Probably the very best method of seeding crimson clover is with the
special clover or alfalfa drill. Where enough clover is grown to warrant
its use this implement is to be highly recommended. The seed is sown in
4-inch rows at just the proper depth and with the right pressure, and the
fertilizer is placed exactly under each row, where it will be immediately
available to the seedlings. Drilled clover requires less seed than
broadcasted clover and produces a more even and certain stand.

In place of the special clover drill an ordinary grain drill equipped with
a clover-seed attachment can be used with good results. Special spouts
should be arranged to lead from the clover-seed box back of the shoes or
disks, in order to deposit the seed directly in the furrow. Chain furrow
closers are best for covering the seed, as they leave the furrows broad
and flat instead of =V= shaped and lessen the danger of the seedlings
being covered with soil during a hard rain.

[Illustration: Fig. 6.--Seeding crimson clover in corn at the last
cultivation.]

For use in intertilled crops there are several types of 1-row drills, the
best for this purpose being the 5-hoe drill equipped with press wheels.

Crimson-clover seed must be covered, but not too deeply. In most soils it
is not enough to depend on rain to effect a covering. An inch in sandy
soils and half an inch in clay soils appear to be about the right depth.
Shallow planting gives the best results in wet seasons and deep planting
in time of drought. Broadcasted seed should be covered with a spike-tooth
harrow or a weeder rather than a heavy harrow or a shovel cultivator. A
harrow made of fairly stiff brush is often useful in loose soil.


=CHOICE OF SEED.=

As a rule, fresh crimson-clover seed is of good viability, and failure
to secure a stand is not often caused by failure of the seed to grow.
Unlike most clovers, crimson-clover seed absorbs water readily and sprouts
quickly. There are practically none of the hard seeds which are so
frequent in red clover and sweet clover, and a germination of 90 per cent
in 48 hour's is not uncommon. The seed deteriorates rapidly, however, and
when more than 2 years old rarely shows a germination in excess of 50 per
cent. Sometimes, when stocks of commercial seed are low, old seed finds
its way to the market, and this, when planted, gives poor results. Old
seed can usually be detected by the dull-brown appearance of the seed coat
as contrasted with the bright, shiny, pinkish or greenish yellow color of
fresh seed. Brown seed, however, is sometimes caused by weathering during
harvest, and such seed is not objectionable unless the weathering has been
excessive.

A common impurity in crimson-clover seed is green, shrunken, and immature
seed, caused by harvesting the crop before it is ripe. Crimson-clover seed
does not germinate readily until it takes on a yellowish tinge; therefore,
green seed should be rejected.

Crimson-clover seed is larger and plumper than red-clover seed and if
properly cleaned should not contain seeds of dodder or the smaller
seeded weeds. Frequently, however, it does contain the seeds of field
peppergrass, yellow trefoil, evening primrose, sheep sorrel, wild
geranium, buttercups, mustards, and other weeds which blossom in early
summer.


=UNHULLED SEED.=

There is a growing belief among farmers that they are less likely to lose
a stand of crimson clover through drought if they sow the seed in the hull
rather than use the hulled seed as it ordinarily appears on the market.
It is claimed that the hulls hold the moisture to some extent and carry
the seedlings over the critical day or two following germination, while
some farmers assert that the unhulled seeds require more moisture for
germination, and the seeds therefore do not sprout until there is enough
moisture in the soil to keep the plants growing. Unhulled seed is bulky
and is not often handled by commercial seedsmen, although one large grower
sells the unhulled seed in compressed, bales similar to small cotton
bales. It usually can be secured from neighboring farmers, however, or is
easily saved at home. The seed can be harvested with a stripper from the
standing crop in the field or the mature crop can be cut and thrashed like
an ordinary grain crop. For local planting on a small scale unhulled seed
is the cheapest and most accessible form of crimson-clover seed.

Unhulled seed is somewhat difficult to sow, because the hairy hulls stick
together in masses and can not be scattered uniformly. To avoid this
trouble the seed may be mixed with moistened earth or with lime, or may be
sown with a blower similar to those used on small forges. A better plan
is to sow on a windy day, throwing the seed vertically into the air and
allowing the wind to scatter it.

Of unhulled seed of the best quality, 100 pounds contains about 1 bushel
(60 pounds) of clean seed. The common grades, however, are usually more
chaffy and require 120 to 180 pounds to make a bushel. From 2 to 3 pounds
of unhulled seed are therefore regarded as equivalent to 1 pound of hulled
seed. A bushel of unhulled seed, even when well packed down, weighs only 6
to 10 pounds and contains about 4 pounds of seed. The appearance of both
hulled and unhulled crimson-clover seed is shown in figure 7.

[Illustration: Fig. 7.--Hulled seed of crimson clover of a common
commercial grade and unhulled seed gathered with a homemade stripper.
(Natural size.)]


=USE OF A NURSE CROP.=

In order to protect the crimson-clover seedlings from the hot sun of late
August it is a common practice in some sections to plant with the clover a
small quantity of some quick-growing crop like buckwheat, cowpeas, rape,
or turnips. A thin stand of these heavier leaved plants furnishes an ideal
shade for the young clover, and on soils which are inclined to bake it
prevents the formation of a crust. The nurse crop must be seeded lightly,
usually not more than half the regular rate, as the ordinary stand shades
the ground so completely as to destroy the crimson clover. On hot clay
soil in the Piedmont region the chances of obtaining a stand of clover are
about twice as good with a nurse crop as without one.

Buckwheat is the principal nurse crop northward from Washington, D. C.
A common rate of seeding is 2 to 3 pecks of buckwheat in 15 pounds of
crimson clover. If the planting can be made in July the buckwheat usually
has time to ripen before frost and thus pay the cost of starting both
stands.

In the cotton belt cowpeas have been used successfully, especially
when seeding on fallow ground. They are seeded broadcast at the rate
of one-half bushel per acre. There is ordinarily not enough time for
the cowpeas to mature, but they add to the value of the stand for fall
pasturage and protect the clover from severe weather in the winter. Both
cowpeas and buckwheat have the merit of being able to grow on poor soil.

Dwarf Essex rape has been used as a nurse crop in a few cases where the
clover was to be pastured by hogs or sheep in the fall. From 2 to 3 pounds
of rape, sown in August, furnishes sufficient cover for a nurse crop.
Cowhorn turnips, winter kale, and mustard are also satisfactory nurse
crops if planted at a rate not exceeding 1 pound of seed per acre. If the
clover is to be saved for seed these latter crops are objectionable, as a
few plants will live over winter and ripen at the same time as the clover.

Where a nurse crop can not be grown conveniently, the crimson-clover
seedlings can be protected from the sun by a light top-dressing of straw,
spread just after the seed is sown.


SEED MIXTURES.

Crimson clover is frequently grown in combination with winter grain, hairy
vetch, or other forage crops having a similar period of growth. The mixed
crop is less liable to lodge than the single crop, cures more readily in
damp weather, and usually furnishes a heavier yield. Another advantage of
the mixed crop is that if either should fail the other will serve as a
cover crop during the winter and bring some return the following spring.
Mixed crops are not desirable if the clover is to be saved for seed.

South of central Virginia crimson clover is usually grown in combination
with winter oats. An early variety of oats, such as the Fulghum, or a late
variety of clover, such as the white blooming, is usually the best, as
the oat crop matures somewhat later than the ordinary crimson clover. The
customary rate of seeding is 15 pounds of the clover and 2½ bushels of
oats per acre. In Delaware and eastern Maryland the most popular companion
crop for crimson clover is winter wheat, although barley makes a desirable
hay crop and is sometimes used. Eye is not desirable for hay, but it
is probably the best of the grains for green manure, as it is hardy,
vigorous, and starts growth early in the spring. Rye and wheat are seeded
at the rate of 1 bushel per acre with the customary quantity of crimson
clover. The accompanying illustration (fig. 8) shows a field seeded to a
mixture of crimson clover and wheat. Usually the grain is well headed,
but in the milk or soft-dough stage, when the clover is ready to cut, the
yield of the mixed crimson clover and grain is often 25 to 50 per cent
greater than that of the clover alone.

[Illustration: Fig. 8.--Crimson clover and wheat in mixture. In the
foreground the crop has been cut and fed green to stock. The remainder
was cut the next day for hay. The grain prevents the crimson clover from
lodging.]

Hairy vetch and crimson clover are sometimes grown together, seeding at
the rate of 20 pounds and 10 pounds per acre, respectively. As both these
plants are likely to lodge in good soil, however, one of the grains is
usually included, a common seeding mixture being oats 2 bushels, hairy
vetch 12 to 15 pounds, and crimson clover 5 pounds. Bur clover, black
medic, and other winter-growing legumes are sometimes found in mixtures
with crimson clover, although such mixtures generally occur by accident
rather than intent. Black medic and crimson clover make' a particularly
good combination on rich soil.

In most of the crimson-clover area the cultivated grasses, such as
timothy, redtop, and orchard grass, are not commonly grown. However,
where these grasses flourish they may well be seeded at the same time
as the crimson clover, provided the latter is planted not earlier than
September 15. In some sections Johnson grass and Bermuda grass make useful
combinations with crimson clover, the grasses making most of their growth
in the summer and the clover in the fall and spring.




=TREATMENT OF THE STAND.=


Ordinarily no special treatment is required after seeding and the clover
goes into the winter without any further handling. If the growth is so
rank that there is danger of the plants being too succulent to survive the
winter, the tops can be reduced by light grazing with small animals, such
as calves, sheep, or chickens, or by mowing with the cutter bar of the
mowing machine set high. If the stand is backward, it may be stimulated
by a light application of nitrate of soda. It is said that a thin stand
can be thickened by grazing lightly with sheep, as the grazing induces
heavier stooling. The aim should be to carry the clover into the winter
with well-hardened leafy stems and with a well-established root system to
withstand heaving out in the spring.

In fields which are to be saved for seed a wise precaution is to go over
them early in the spring and chop out the weeds. If wild onion and other
weeds are chopped off in April, they do not make enough growth by May to
contaminate the seed crop.




=MALADIES.=


The only disease seriously affecting crimson clover is the clover
stem-rot, root-rot, or wilt, a disease resembling the stem-rot, or wilt,
of lettuce and other plants. This disease is prevalent in nearly all
the crimson-clover States and sometimes does considerable damage. The
stem-rot affects the clover at all seasons, but is more noticeable in the
spring, when it sometimes causes large spots of clover suddenly to wilt
and fall. Occasionally an entire field is affected, but the disease is
most prevalent in low, rich spots. Examination of the plants discloses
a rotting off or decay of the stems close to the ground, followed
immediately by the appearance on the stems of small black lumps, or
sclerotia, about the size of clover seed. These sclerotia are a means of
spreading the disease and are often harvested in the hay or in the seed
crop. The only known remedy for the stem-rot is to cease growing clover or
alfalfa on an infested field for three or four years, substituting cowpeas
or soy beans. Seed from fields known to be infested should, of course, be
avoided.

No insects are known to affect crimson clover seriously, nor are weeds
of great importance in clover planted on clean fields. When planted in
cultivated crops or in poorly prepared ground crimson clover is often
seriously damaged by a rank growth of chickweed, knawel (moss weed),
winter cress, and other winter-growing annuals.


WASHINGTON : GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : 1920


       *       *       *       *       *


=Transcriber Note=

Minor typos have been corrected. Illustrations were moved to prevent
splitting paragraphs. Produced from files generously made available by
USDA through The Internet Archive. All resultant materials are placed in
the Public Domain.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of USDA Farmers' Bulletin No. 1142:
Growing Crimson Clover, by Leonard Wheeler Kephart

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK USDA FARMERS' BULLETIN NO. 1142 ***

***** This file should be named 63166-8.txt or 63166-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/1/6/63166/

Produced by Tom Cosmas from files generously made available
by USDA through The Internet Archive. All resultant
materials are placed in the Public Domain.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
