The Project Gutenberg eBook of Penmanship, by Leta Severance Hiles

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Penmanship
       Teaching and Supervision

Author: Leta Severance Hiles

Release Date: November 4, 2021 [eBook #66667]

Language: English


Produced by: Craig Kirkwood and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
             at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PENMANSHIP ***

Transcriber’s Notes:

Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

Additional Transcriber’s Notes are at the end.

       *       *       *       *       *

PENMANSHIP

_Teaching and Supervision_




PENMANSHIP


  _Teaching and
  Supervision_

  BY
  LETA SEVERANCE HILES

  _Supervisor of Penmanship
  Long Beach, California_

  JESSE RAY MILLER
  3474 UNIVERSITY AVENUE
  LOS ANGELES

       *       *       *       *       *

  COPYRIGHT 1924, BY JESSE RAY MILLER

  FIRST PRINTING
  APRIL, 1924

  _Printed in the United States of America
  Press of Jesse Ray Miller
  Los Angeles_




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER

     I THE PENMANSHIP PROBLEM                                       9

       _The Commercial Factor--The Educational Factor--Educational
       Value._

    II FUNDAMENTALS CONCERNED IN THE PROBLEM                       15

       _Physical Training Phase--Correct Posture--Correct
       Movement--Visualization of Letter Forms--Practice--
       Application of the Correct Habits to Daily
       Requirements._

   III THE GENERALLY ACCEPTED SOLUTION: MUSCULAR MOVEMENT          43

       _Conservation of Health a Prime Factor in the Solution--
       Economy of Time a Result of the Solution._

    IV PREPARATION OF THE TEACHER                                  51

       _The Technique of the Subject--The Ability to Secure
       Results--The Penmanship Perspective._

     V SUITABLE EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS                            61

       _Text--Blackboard and the Use of It--Paper--Folders--
       Pencil--Pen--Penholder--Blotter--Ink--Economy in the Use
       of Material._

    VI SOME WORKABLE SUGGESTIONS                                   72

       _How to Study--How to Move and Slant the Paper--
       Blackboard Work of the Pupils--Name Cards--Figures--
       Alphabet--Endurance Tests--Objectives in Good Writing
       Habits--Progress Lesson--Segregation--Line Quality--
       Samples--Preparation for the regular Visit of the
       Supervisor--Counting--Use of the Timepiece--Awards--Use
       of Standard Penmanship Tests._

   VII SUGGESTIONS FOR THE GRADES, JUNIOR AND SENIOR HIGH SCHOOLS  85

       _A General Not a Specific Plan--First Grade--Second
       Grade--Third Grade--Fourth Grade--Fifth Grade--Sixth
       Grade--Seventh Grade--Eighth Grade--Junior High
       School--Senior High School._

  VIII SUPERVISION AND THE PENMANSHIP SUPERVISOR                  113

       _Supervision in the Past--Function of the Supervisor--
       Leadership a Prime Qualification--Personality a
       Necessary Qualification--Broad Preparation Indispensable
       to the Supervisor--Continual Preparation Essential--
       Rating--The Best Qualified Supervisor._

  BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                    123

  INDEX                                                           126




INTRODUCTION


Reading, writing, and arithmetic have for long been looked upon as the
fundamentals in education. And in very truth they are. Altogether too
little attention has been given the expression of thought involved
in the study of any school subject whether such expression takes the
form of oral or written language. In fact, many failures in school
and misunderstandings in actual life are due to inability to properly
interpret text, read intelligently, or speak correctly.

No small part of this entire problem, especially when applied to grade
pupils, is the mechanical or penmanship side. Everywhere there is
criticism, on the part of teachers and parents, of the quality of the
pupils’ writing. In many instances the process is a slow and laborious
one. The bodily positions assumed by pupils during the operation of
writing are harmful. The effort frequently results in an illegible
scrawl. Too often, little or no attention is given penmanship in the
grades and consequently boys and girls go through life laboring under a
serious handicap.

In the following pages an attempt is made to bring definitely and
concisely before educators the fundamental facts necessary to secure
legibility and rapidity in penmanship, without causing strain of eye or
cramp of hand. The treatment of the subject is simple and direct. The
discussion of the problem of penmanship is followed by a consideration
of the essentials necessary to the establishment of a habit that shall
result in good penmanship. The materials necessary are taken up in
detail. The teacher’s preparation is dwelt upon. Workable suggestions
are given a place. One chapter deals with the minimum requirements for
all and the closing chapter discusses supervision.

The entire work is based upon an extended experience with pupils
and teachers. Every suggestion and direction has been worked out in
actual practice. The volume has been prepared in response to continued
requests from teachers, principals, and superintendents who desire
explicit directions that can be used to supplement any system of
muscular movement penmanship.

The author wishes to express her gratitude to the hundreds of teachers,
scattered throughout several states in the Union, to whom she has had
the privilege of offering instruction and from whom helpful suggestions
have come.

  L. S. H.




CHAPTER ONE THE PENMANSHIP PROBLEM


THE COMMERCIAL FACTOR

We are living in a practical age. Every institution of worth points to
the truth of this statement. Of every plan advanced the query comes,
“Will it stand a practical test?” We are constantly experimenting with,
and adopting, new methods, and those in force today may be displaced
tomorrow as being behind the spirit of the time. It is only natural
that the commercialization of penmanship should take place.

When a business man is asked what qualification counts most in
employing clerks he is very apt to say, “Other things being equal,
the good writer gets the place.” Henry Clews, the Wall Street banker,
frankly states that the beginning of his successful career may be
traced to good penmanship.

A letter of application for a position is not judged by school room
standards, but by business standards. These two sets of standards
should be in harmony. An educator of authority finds that “there is
little contention as to the function the child is to serve when he
becomes part of the world in which he shall eventually find himself.
Our methods as practiced however, would hardly be recognized as having
any foundation in the thought for future citizenship.” Think of the
vast army of boys and girls who leave the elementary school at an early
age to earn a livelihood. These should be given the best practical
equipment.

To be sure, there are those who cite instances of great men whose
handwriting is almost unreadable, and argue that point in favor of
allowing all public school pupils to be poor writers. Common sense
teaches us that it is unwise to burden ourselves with an unnecessary
handicap.

Others will say that it is not worth while, as every one will use
a typewriter upon entering the commercial world. Only a certain
proportion will enter the world of commerce, and a majority of those
who do enter tell us that they have as much work to do with pen or
pencil as on the typewriter.

The initial drafts of the majority of all important documents are
usually written with the pen. We have the word of many an author
that an attempt to dictate the first draft results disastrously to
the content of the manuscript. We therefore infer that in matters of
importance the use of the mechanical device is not conducive to the
best composition. The typewriter is of great convenience after the
first draft has been revised.


THE EDUCATIONAL FACTOR

Again, would it not be vastly worth while, even for school purposes
alone, to learn rapid, easy and legible hand-writing, since a majority
of pupils spend nine years in the elementary and junior high schools? A
good percentage finish high school and many pursue a college career for
four years. What an asset good easy writing is in school and college!
Every pupil owes it as a duty to himself and to his instructors to
express himself legibly on paper.

Finally, while its worth cannot be fully estimated, good writing is
eagerly sought and its possessor finds it ever a ready servant and
valued friend. We should strive for usable knowledge. In McMurray’s
_How To Study_ we learn that “It is a part of one’s work as a student,
therefore, to plan to turn one’s knowledge to some account; to plan
not alone to sell it for money, but to use it in various ways in daily
life.”


EDUCATIONAL VALUE

Perhaps the most widely recognized educational value of good penmanship
would come under the head of utility. Pleasing angles, graceful curves,
uniformity, and clear strong lines appeal alike to all. From the
attitude taken by many educational folk, relegating this subject in the
curriculum to the background, we might think that they prefer illegible
writing. Yet frequently these are the very persons who are heard to
complain the loudest and longest over poorly written test papers and
unreadable letters from friends.

Muscular movement penmanship may be utilized to advantage in school and
out. In the first place it saves the pupils’ time and physical energy
in execution and the teachers’ time and energy in interpreting. In the
second place it is most emphatically demanded by the world that many
of these pupils will enter upon leaving school. Parents draw their
conclusions, many times, regarding the quality of work in the school
largely from the appearance of written work.

Pupils who have persistently followed the drill until it has influenced
their actual writing will soon realize their power: here is the
evidence on paper, the measure of the effort put forth. They have
conquered both mentally and physically. Will not the confidence
established in their own ability be of value to them in mastering other
subjects? What gives more pleasure, self-respect and encouragement to
persevere than the conscious knowledge of skill? This consciousness of
power and skill is a tremendous educational force and one that should
receive constant recognition with reference to penmanship.

Many are the pupils who have great difficulty in gaining book lore, but
who find the manual arts attractive. To such the consciousness that
they can do even one thing well is a powerful inducement toward the
mastery of something less attractive.

Pupils learn before they finish the elementary school that proper
conventions must be observed in order to preserve social order and
relations. When these conventions are overlooked to a great extent in
writing, pupils are not gaining the most that the subject has to teach
them. When irregularities become noticeable a check should be placed;
otherwise the habit will become strong enough to be of great hindrance
in later life. In no subject can a tendency to tear down conventions
be discovered more easily than in penmanship and nowhere can we better
impress upon pupils the desirability of obeying, to a reasonable
degree, the conventional lines which all social beings are bound to
recognize.

Who cannot recall at least one “bad boy” who has been completely
reformed by some one of the manual arts? Muscular movement penmanship
has many such to its credit. Teachers and supervisors are called upon
quite as much to reform as to form and inform.




CHAPTER TWO FUNDAMENTALS CONCERNED IN THE PROBLEM


THE PHYSICAL TRAINING PHASE

Pupils who are apt at athletics will easily recognize the purpose of
muscular movement penmanship. They will draw upon former experiences
in the field or gymnasium and compare the value of relaxation, good
posture, rhythm, and continuity of movement. They will recognize that
the same laws of control govern Indian club swinging, field sports, and
penmanship. They will appreciate the fact that to obtain good results
with the pen they must follow with military precision the directions
of the leader. Interest will be doubled when pupils really find
themselves. Many pupils obey the laws of correlation naturally, and
through their athletics they gain control of the muscular adjustment
that operates in the process of writing.

Adult learners of muscular movement frequently have more difficulty
in relaxing completely than do younger pupils. Often with adults the
habit of bodily relaxation has not been developed along with other
habits, and therefore muscular tension prevails. A leading criticism on
Americans is that we never relax.

James says: “It is your relaxed and easy worker who is in no hurry
and quite thoughtless most of the while of consequences who is your
efficient worker; and tension and anxiety, present and future, all
mixed up together in our mind at once, are the surest drags upon steady
progress.”

[Illustration: AT ATTENTION]

[Illustration: RELAXATION]

[Illustration: READY TO ASSUME CORRECT POSITION OF ARMS, HANDS, PEN AND
PAPER]

The mind must be concentrated upon the relaxation of the muscles in
order to get the best results. As writing is feeling passed through
thought and fixed in form, it is very important in writing that the
mind help make the muscles to make movements, just as it helps them to
relax. By putting the muscles in a workable condition at the beginning
of each lesson, great improvement in muscular response will be
observed. Muscular relaxation must be considered seriously if we would
make real progress in muscular training. We all know how cramped and
tremulous the letters are when they are written by a hand that is under
nervous tension. The nerves must be at ease, the pen must rest lightly
in the hand in order to obtain the best results. Teachers who
have not the ability to relax themselves, cannot hope to lead the class
to do so. The tone of voice used in giving directions, whether musical
or strident, has to do with inducing relaxation. The following plan has
proven of value in the class room:

1. Pupils sit erect in seats, stretch arms out even with the shoulders,
feet on the floor, heads erect, while the teacher counts softly to ten,
with the pupils; at ten, drop the arms to the sides. Repeat six times.
A practiced eye will soon see whose arms are tense. Ask pupils to
become as limber as they would in skating, jumping, dancing, horseback
riding or swimming.

2. Pupils sit erect in seats, bend forward from the hips, raise arms
over the desk, and six inches from the desk, make a square turn at the
elbow, count ten slowly, drop the arms on the desk; repeat six times.

3. Pupils sit erect, bend from the hips, both elbows on the lower
corners of the desk, relax, dropping the forearm on the desk; repeat
six times.

4. Retaining position in paragraph 3 let pupils roll the muscle below
the elbow in a circular manner to a soft musical count, from one to
ten. Eyes should be first directed toward the arm, then away from it,
toward the ceiling. By following the last suggestion, it is observed
that pupils relax unconsciously. All of this drill will be of no value
unless pupils are able to retain a relaxed condition of the muscles
while the writing instrument is in use. Let them take the handle end of
the pen, and prepare for this circular motion before making it.

5. It will be necessary for the teacher to spend a few minutes at the
beginning of every lesson with one or more relaxing exercises during
the first months of each school year, and later if found necessary. It
is advisable to break the lesson with relaxation exercises if it is
observed that pupils are becoming keyed-up through effort.

6. Rhythm and regularity of movement are essential. Pupils’ counting
aloud relieves the tension. It may be necessary to lay the pens down
once or twice, for a few seconds each time, during the lesson. Ability
to control the writing arm comes in proportion to our ability to relax
the controlling muscles. Control in the matter of penmanship is a vital
educational factor. Says a well known authority: “Could the school
teach effectively the lesson of self control, we need have little
fear of the results when the product of the system is thrown upon the
currents of the world. What is the most important attribute of man as
a moral being? May we not answer, the faculty of self control? This
it is which forms a chief distinction between the human being and the
brute.”


CORRECT POSTURE

Correct posture while writing is an essential; first, from the
standpoint of health, and again, that we may have free play of the
writing muscles. Proper seating has an important place here. The desk
should be sufficiently high from the seat, so that, when a pupil is
seated and with both arms on the desk, the shoulders should not be
raised. If the desk is too low, pupils will bend in the shoulders
instead of from the hips and the chest will be compressed and the spine
contorted.

No doubt many cases of spinal trouble are a direct result of improper
seating and unhealthful posture during school hours. Pupils frequently
bend the neck and strain the nerves and muscles uselessly. The hint,
“Heads up” is often a sufficient reminder and will serve to correct
this ungraceful and harmful habit. By sitting almost square in front
of the desk, circulation is not impeded in any way and relaxation will
result more easily. The body supports itself, and must not touch the
desk. The eyes should be fourteen inches from the paper. In order to be
comfortable, the feet must touch the floor. It is within the province
of the manual training department to provide wooden footstools of
simple construction for the small pupils who must sit at large desks.

With the feet on the floor, body erect, ready to bend from the hips,
chest high, arms hanging at the sides in a relaxed manner, we are
ready for the next step. By placing the elbows at, or near the lower
corner of the desk, raising forearms, then relaxing and dropping to
the desk, the pupils are impressed with the idea that they must keep
the cushionlike muscle on the desk. The elbows may extend beyond the
edge of the desk, perhaps an inch, if this adds to the comfort of the
writer. There should be a right angle turn at the elbow.

Drill on correct posture should be given frequently until acquired,
several times during a lesson, in fact, while learning. Too many
liberties with these rules will cause trouble later when the next step
is to be accomplished.

[Illustration: READY FOR WORK]

With the forearms on the desk, close the right hand; open and close
several times; with the right hand half open, the tips and nails of
the third and little fingers touch the desk. The knuckles of the
thumb and three fingers should be in sight. Every joint is bent a
trifle in correct position of the hand. The two points of contact then
are a large portion of the under forearm and the tops and nails of
the third and little fingers. The wrist should be kept straight and
free from the paper. The side of the hand must not touch the paper.
Slip a card under the side of the hand to test this point. The muscles
that hold the third and little finger in correct positions need to be
strengthened. Pupils are apt to straighten the fingers and bring about
a tension or go to the other extreme and curl the third and little
fingers into the palm of the hand and glide on the knuckle joints. Both
positions strain the ligaments and bear away from, instead of toward,
good control. It is most important that a beginner should watch the
position of the hand. Other mistakes may be rectified gradually, but
correct position of the hand must be established at once.

The penholder is held by the thumb and first and second finger,
touching the second finger near the root of the nail. The first finger
joints are bent slightly. The first finger rests on the penholder at
least an inch from the point of the pen. The thumb joint is also bent.
The penholder may cross above or below the knuckle joint of the first
finger. The penholder should point half way between the shoulder and
the elbow. Keep the penpoint on the paper squarely, wearing both nibs
equally.

[Illustration: READY FOR ACTION

READY FOR PENHOLDING]

In _Comprehensive Physical Culture_, we find this valuable suggestion:
“In sitting it is necessary to hold the chest up; to guard against
bending forward at the waist line, for this contracts the chest, cramps
the lungs and stomach, and often produces dyspepsia. In sitting, if
one wishes to bend, the movement should be from the hips, but never
from the waist; the knees should never be crossed, for this position,
besides being inelegant and ungraceful, often leads to paralysis by
diverting the blood from the leg through pressure. The one rule to be
observed by the woman who seeks to be healthy and graceful is to keep
the chest active; it should never be relaxed; holding this part of the
body constantly erect gives real poise to the carriage and strength
to the muscles. A fine bearing is of great advantage, for it has a
significance which people intuitively recognize and respect; the person
who comes before us chest raised and head erect inspires confidence.
Other things being equal, the person who elevates the chest constantly
is more self-respecting than the one who habitually depresses it.”


CORRECT MOVEMENT

Pupils must be taught that a line is the product of the motion used;
“that the motion preceding the contact of the pen to the paper must be
in the direction of the line to be made, and that some letters being
more complex than others, less speed should be used.” For example, the
straight stroke exercise is essential as a beginning step in movement
application because it not only stretches the muscles, but correctly
done it teaches direction. Movement that prepares for the straight
stroke exercise is best obtained by taking correct position and pushing
the first finger to and from the center of the chest with the third and
fourth finger nails gliding on the desk and forming a movable rest.
The wrist must be kept free at this time, and the forearm moves on the
cushionlike muscle below the elbow. We base the direction or slant of
down strokes in letters later upon this straight stroke exercise. If
the ovals, the next exercise in order, take an incorrect slant at any
time, return to the practice of the straight strokes as a corrective
means toward the proper slant.

Pupils must know that the direction of movement is one of the chief
essentials, and that before they can possess ability to produce
properly proportioned forms they must develop their movement in the
proper direction. They must be led to understand that the mere free and
easy action of the arm in any direction is not necessarily a movement
that can be used in writing.

To insure against too slow a movement it will be necessary to use some
measure for time. Counting is a good means of regulating the movement;
it keeps the class working enthusiastically together, and gives an
idea of how fast to practice. One count should be given for each down
stroke. The count, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10; 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 20; 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 30, etc., to one hundred is
advised for straight strokes and ovals. All pupils counting in concert
with the teacher at the rate of about two hundred down strokes per
minute is effective, as the oral count relieves the muscular tension
that is apt to prevail at this time. Insist that every arm move from
the shoulder and that each pupil feel correct movement and observe his
own arm. It is advisable to use the watch, and time pupils daily on a
part of all drill work. If the count be too rapid, nervous spasmodic
movements will result; if too slow, the fingers or wrist joint will be
apt to act, and finger movement will be the result. A steady rhythmic
beat is essential, to tone down the speed of the nervous and erratic
and inspire the slow ones into more rapid response.

There is a subtle influence in the sprightly musical count as well as
in the conversational count, such as “round, round, round,” or “light,
light, light,” to induce proper width to a narrow oval, or lightness to
a heavy line. A mistake that is fatal to early progress is frequently
made by allowing pupils to take the pen in hand to write before
automatic movement is gained. Much drill on relaxation and study of
the writing machine and attention to rhythm work at the correct speed
is necessary at the beginning of each lesson, to make for automatism.
Sufficient speed to discourage finger and induce muscular movement must
be insisted upon at all times.

At this point it will be observed that pupils vary in regard to
their ability in the use of free movement. The group plan meets this
difficulty very successfully. Some allowance must be made for new
pupils, those habitually irregular, and for the slow pupils in rooms
where children have not been segregated for ability.

When all is done that can be done by the class plan to make pupils
understand relaxation, posture, and motive power, we find that there
will still be some who have not made sufficient progress to advance.
The important question is, when are these pupils going to have an
opportunity to learn? How can encouragement be offered to those who
have done well, and at the same time continue repetition of what is
necessary with those who have accomplished but little?

The group plan is advised by many successful teachers. Assign pupils
who have done well and who can practice in the right way to seats at
the left of the room (“A” group) as the teacher faces the class, it
being understood that those who prove themselves unworthy of being in
the “A” group will have a place in the “B” group. After the segregation
is complete and the plan under way it will be well to keep a check on
the “A” group; some pupils forget quickly when left to themselves,
while it develops independence and pride in others. The “B” group will
occupy the rows to the right of the teacher as she faces the pupils,
and by stepping to the extreme right side for the survey every hand may
be seen while at work. The members of the “B” group understand that
they are there because they need special help, and will be promoted
as soon as they learn the lessons already mastered by the “A” group.
At the beginning of every lesson a careful but brief review will be
necessary of the points that the “B” group is expected to learn. The
entire class should give attention at this time.

The “B” group is still preparing with the handle end of the pen while
the “A” group will be actually making lines. Economy of time should
be studied, or the period will be wasted; both groups must be kept
busy all the time. The same count will answer for both divisions.
Occasionally it will be well to give the “A” group a certain amount
of work to accomplish and to note if it is done within the right time
limit. They are to compare carefully with their models and also to work
for improvement in the product without special instruction. The “B”
group will not make so many exercises but their posture and movement
will be growing stronger every lesson. In order that they may not
become discouraged, it is well to let them make some of the exercises
each day but the greater part of the time should be given over to rapid
changes of relaxation, posture and movement until these essentials are
thoroughly ingrained. The “B” group will be greatly helped by working
at the board, to the same count that the “A” group uses at the seats.
Once during the lesson allow the “B” group to rest and watch the “A”
group work. The pupils in the “B” group will not cover as much subject
matter as will the “A” since it is composed of the new pupils and those
who have the greatest difficulties. No pupil should be promoted to the
“A” group until he assumes correct posture in all written work and can
make ovals, straight strokes and short words with correct movement. He
must prove his ability as an independent worker and show reasonably
good results in order to be considered an “A” pupil.


VISUALIZATION OF LETTER FORMS

It has been said, “The three arts of education are seeing, reading,
thinking. The boy who learns to see is awakened; the boy who learns to
read is enriched; the boy who learns to think is emancipated.” Why does
not an artist always make a desirable and pleasing picture? Perhaps it
is because he does not see the subject correctly or to advantage, or
perhaps he has not mastered all the mechanical difficulties. It is for
the teacher to decide whether all has been done that can be done to
assist the pupils to see the model letter form correctly. Perhaps there
exist mechanical difficulties in posture and movement that prevent a
free execution of the letter form that may exist in the mind.

Pupils should understand that they are to educate the head and hand
together. Concentration on correct forms goes hand in hand with
practice. Some pupils have greater aptitude than others toward
perception of form; it is certain that the hand will not learn to
reproduce constantly a form that has not been fully and entirely
idealized by the mind. It has been discovered that human beings
vary greatly in the completeness, definiteness, and extent of their
visual images. Pupils should be impressed through as many sense
channels as possible. Some learn through explanations, others through
demonstrations at the board, still others by working at the board
themselves. Out of this variety of impressions each pupil will find the
one that is most lasting for himself. Every penmanship teacher should
recognize this principle of multiple impression.

Mental pictures are what we mean when we speak of “noticing” things.
We think we are noticing all sorts of things during our waking hours;
as a matter of fact, we recognize fewer things than we suppose. Ask a
pupil to describe any familiar object and prove this statement. If you
point out the various characteristics he will quickly see them, and
will be likely in future trials to see them; but if left to himself
he would need a great deal of time to become familiar with the main
features. Frequent review of model letter forms is necessary, for it
keeps our minds fresh and helps to reveal new and hitherto unthought-of
aspects. Each view well considered, then put aside, freshens us for
the next one. We are thus led to make trials and discover relations
which otherwise would remain hidden. Many pupils, for the most part
unsuccessful, never get so far as that. Many who fail believe that they
have seen all there is to see, take up something else, or do nothing.

Pupils may be led to observe the forms of letters and their common
characteristics through variations of common principles. To illustrate:
many letters are modifications of the oval exercise, near or remote. In
almost every writing system on the market we have four, the O, A, C,
and E. Modifications of the straight stroke are more numerous still;
then we have letters that show a combination and modification of the
two exercises. Pupils should be able to see and describe just which
stroke gives slant and character to the letter. There is a striking
analogy in the beginning, ending, and width of many of our letters.

Very rarely is the image the exact reproduction of the percept; it
differs in distinctness, outline, detail, and sometimes even in most
important qualities. Look at the model letter, close the eyes, you will
still see the form. Retentive and reproductive powers are at work,
while the image is in process of formation. Form perception, and other
mental pictures than what we are striving for, are present and act upon
and modify present percepts.

Let the room be quiet, so quiet that there is nothing to distract.
Require the pupils to lay their heads on the desks, shut their eyes,
and rest, not for long, for fear of day dreams. Without allowing them
to awake from their playsleep, picture in brief vivid statements,
without repetition, or unnecessary detail, the parts of a letter. Raise
the heads, open the eyes, take pens and ask pupils to reproduce a
picture of the letter just described.

In effective visualization certain conditions must be fulfilled. In the
first place the exposure must have lasted for a sufficient length of
time, very much as is required in photography. We can gain no mental
picture of things where the exposure is too brief.

A careful study of letter forms must engender the habit of observation
and knowledge of the difference between accuracy and vagueness. Since
penmanship is one of the manual arts it will be executed definitely
right or definitely wrong. Chamberlain on the value of manual training
says: “The more accurate the work in hand, the less likely is doubt
and uncertainty to play a part. In grammar and history a mistake upon
the pupil’s part may easily pass unchallenged. The student glides over
an error unconsciously or without intent; and even the teacher may not
detect the fault. In a word both the teacher and pupil are likely to
be deceived. In the shop or in the cooking room it is quite different.
Be the box too short, the metal too thick or too thin, the joint too
loose, the basket askew, the stitches uneven, or the ingredients
improper in proportion, little doubt need enter the pupil’s mind as to
the rightness of his work.”


PRACTICE

A few years ago Dr. Gulick laid down the following hints on training
for the boys in their athletic work in New York City:

1. Always warm up slowly and cool off gradually when finished.

2. Stop practice when you are exhausted.

3. Dress lightly for practice or competition.

4. Practice regularly, a little each day if possible.

5. Have regular hours for eating and sleeping.

6. Don’t smoke.

To a person who has the correct perspective on the penmanship habit
the application of the hints enumerated will seem quite reasonable.
To train in any line, one must practice. Repetition is necessary, and
the time element essential, as it takes many efforts to accomplish the
desired end, good penmanship. The muscles to be trained are large, and
the conventional forms are small.

With a little forethought and planning the practice period may be
varied, live and interesting. Everyone must learn, sooner or later,
that much discipline may be gained by keeping steadily at work not
interesting in itself. James says: “We have of late been learning
much of the philosophy of tenderness in education; ‘interest’ must be
assiduously awakened in everything, difficulties must be smoothed away.
Soft pedagogics have taken the place of the old steep and rocky paths
to learning. But from this lukewarm air the bracing oxygen of effort is
left out. It is nonsense to suppose that every step in education can be
interesting.”

Thoughtless practice might much better be left undone. There is no
use in trying to excuse careless work to oneself with the thought,
“I won’t count this time.” Each careless stroke is being registered
though we do not count it; for nothing we ever do, strictly speaking,
is ever wholly blotted out. Paths frequently and recently trodden are
those that lie most open, and those which may be expected most easily
to lead to results.

The first practice may be difficult, for the nervous and muscular
systems have a new lesson to learn. The second and third trials will be
easier, for the body has begun to recognize what lies before it. The
following attempts will steadily become easier. A path means economy in
traveling. The muscle should work with a fatalistic steadiness; if so,
the result must necessarily be work done in a clean and finished manner.

[Illustration: READY FOR DRILL]

To be concrete, let us presuppose a thirty minute practice period in
muscular movement penmanship, under fairly favorable conditions. The
desk should be adjusted for physical comfort. The light should come
from the left side. Loose sheets of good quality paper eight by ten
and one-half inches in size, with three-eighths inch spacing should be
furnished. At least two sheets should be placed under the one being
used, that the penpoint may be saved extra wear. A fluid ink that
flows freely is best. A coarse, flexible pen, blotter, and ink-wiper
complete the list of supplies. It is assumed that the adopted manual
containing instructions and model letter forms is always on the desk
for reference during the practice period.

Our first aim should be to get the mind and muscle into action. To this
end at least two hundred two-space straight strokes or the same number
of ovals should be made in one minute. Secondly, this will assist in
the form building of the letter to be mastered, which let us assume is
the capital O. A light smooth line will be obtained by limiting the
amount of ink. Make at least two hundred strokes with one dip of ink.
Correct speed will be best obtained by requiring the time limit in all
drill work. Correct slant should develop as a result of the correct
teaching of the straight stroke exercise.

Having done this preliminary drill we are now ready to consider the
second point of the lesson, namely, the making of the letter O. The
first consideration is the general form. By comparison with the model
we find a striking analogy in width and slant, to the form of the oval.
The ending stroke and the points that characterize the letter must be
observed, and lastly, the size is to be noted. Close the eyes a moment
and see if the image is fixed. Prepare to write by using the handle
end of the penholder until the right rhythm has been established by
counting one, two, for the first O; three, four, for the second O;
five, six, for the third O; seven, eight, for the fourth O; nine,
ten, for the fifth letter of the group. Five “make believe” letters
is the result of this count; we can easily make three groups of five
each, across the page. Time consumed will be one minute for sixty to
seventy-five letters. When the muscular adjustment is perfected through
this preparatory motion, then, and then, only, are the pupils ready to
write. Write and compare with the model, time and again. If the letter
has been visualized correctly, each child will be able to criticize
his own work effectively. Glaring errors should be pointed out first
and remedied. Work on this letter might occupy the main portion of the
writing lesson for many days before passing to another letter form.

Any class that has been drilled correctly on the ovals, straight
strokes and capital O should be able to apply the movement acquired
to a short word and this perhaps forms the most important part of
the lesson. For example take “Omen,” spelling the letters aloud,
capital O-m-e-n. Words so dictated should be executed by junior high
school pupils and adults at the rate of at least fifteen to eighteen
per minute. This will prevent any possibility of a return to finger
movement at this time. Dictation of letters is quite effective with
slow pupils. The application of movement to a word, at the close of
each lesson, will lead the pupils quite unconsciously into a better
movement of all written work. Here they get the help along the lines
necessary to steady and modify the movement, and a chance to get into
the swing of actual writing without too much thought as regards the
content. Such drill serves the same purpose in penmanship that scale
practice does in music. The writing of words at the close of each
lesson serves as the connecting link between the theoretical drill work
and practical writing. Such daily drill work as just suggested at the
close of the writing lesson will effectually eliminate the sharp line
of demarcation between the drills and “real writing.” In a short time a
list of words will be the result, and these with others may be combined
into sentences. The supplementary words given should incorporate
all the small letters of the alphabet; the one-space letters first,
thirteen in all, then the loops above the line, _b_, _f_, _h_, _k_, and
_l_; loops below the line, _g_, _j_, _y_, and _z_; and lastly, those
irregular in height, _p_, _t_, _q_, and _d_. A fair allotment of time
for the above suggestive plan would be five to ten minutes on ovals
and strokes; ten to fifteen minutes on the letter O; and five to ten
minutes on the word-practice.

The group plan seems to be the only logical method of reaching all
pupils with the instruction necessary to their peculiar needs. The
advanced group will be learning to act independently, while the other
will be learning basic principles. Friendly criticism and rivalry
should be fostered, by comparing the method by which results were
obtained. Let one group watch the other work. Let the group watching
count for the other and change about. Generally, the entire class work,
if any, should be posted, unless it be known that a certain page is
posted because of its special merit. Pupils should be taught at the
outset that team work in a drill subject is what counts and should
take proper pride in good work as a class. Every class will produce a
few good writers. In many schools a new lesson is not taken up before
seventy-five per cent of the pupils have accomplished the preceding
lesson well according to standards previously agreed upon. It is
often impossible for all members of a class to attain perfection in
penmanship. We do not demand that in other subjects.


APPLICATION OF THE CORRECT HABITS TO DAILY REQUIREMENTS

The muscular movement writing habit should become automatic when pupils
have developed enough skill through exercises to apply the movement
consistently to all written work. The best skilled teachers might give
a lesson daily in any grade, but unless the principles inculcated
during that lesson are followed conscientiously during the remaining
periods of the day the gain will be slight. If time is allotted for
practice the result is surely worth applying to all written exercises.
The Committee of Fifteen appointed to investigate the coordination of
studies in primary and grammar grades propounded the question, “Has
penmanship distinct pedagogical value?” The following is one of the
best answers: “Penmanship as an art is but pen drawing, as a factor in
education it should be taught more frequently in connection with other
studies. Both penmanship and drawing suffer much from their isolated
position in the school course. We therefore need to teach writing while
teaching other subjects and the reverse.”

In grounding the movement application habit we may well follow these
maxims:

First, focalize the attention of the pupils on the habit to be
acquired. Teach definitely relaxation, posture, movement, and
visualization.

Maxim number two tells us to suffer no exception to occur until the new
habit is firmly rooted in our lives.

Number three calls for frequent repetition. We must therefore give
daily drill on the points that go to make up the correct writing habit.

Fourthly, “Don’t preach too much.” Lie in wait for the practical
opportunities, and get the pupils at once both to think and to act.
Such opportunities are never lacking, since so many lessons are
conducted through the medium of the pen.

Lastly, keep the faculty of personal effort alive by a little
gratuitous exercise every day. After a high degree of perfection has
been reached it is maintained only by the follow-up system of daily
effort directed toward the retention of the habit.

The habit of movement application demands vigorous and continued
effort; the exertion may possibly be so great that the pupil is
temporarily more discommoded than by his former habit. If the wise
course is pursued the old disability will vanish, a new path will be
made in the brain, and application of movement will be established.

The main problem with every teacher is how to assist pupils in linking
up the principles that have been mastered, namely, correct posture, and
movement applied to drills and short words with the practical writing.
The drill on short words will prove as valuable as any other part of
this theory work. By the laws of association, pupils will connect the
muscular sensation of the short, rapidly written word, with what is
required when a variety of longer words or sentences is dictated.

At the beginning of every lesson in which writing is used as a vehicle
for thought, attention to the correct habit will be the means of
setting many pupils right, and of increasing from week to week the
number of those who do all writing with muscular movement. Finally,
all incorrect movement will be eliminated, and we may then return
to visualization. A proper balance must be preserved in regard to
seeing and doing, or our results will be one sided. When a pupil
“finds” himself with reference to the application of movement problem,
attention may be almost equally divided between retention of that
movement and form building. By the time form is established movement
will be second nature, and with a little continuous practice will never
be lost.

It is time to require all written work to be done with muscular
movement when pupils can make good two-space ovals, four hundred across
an eight inch page, and straight strokes in the same manner; have
visualized one capital letter and can make it at the right speed per
minute, for example, sixty to eighty O’s per minute; and can write
short words such as “men” and “mine” with correct movement, in correct
posture, and within the correct space limit. An easy way to begin is to
require application to the subjects where the mind is least concerned
as to the content, for example, the spelling lesson.

If pupils have been taught to turn the searchlight of investigation
on their own habits they will be entirely conscious of the feeling of
mastery that takes possession when muscular movement becomes automatic.

Those who have not thus succeeded should look well into the basic
principles of relaxation, correct posture, and movement, especially
as applied to letters and short words. Study the hand and arm in its
preparatory motion while working at the correct speed. Care should be
exercised that there be no movements of the joints of the wrist, thumb
or fingers. Alternate the preparatory motion with writing until the
sensation of mastery prevails.




CHAPTER THREE THE GENERALLY ACCEPTED SOLUTION: MUSCULAR MOVEMENT


CONSERVATION OF HEALTH A PRIME FACTOR IN THE SOLUTION

Truly, necessity is the mother of invention. At the dawn of the present
commercial age, the finger movement and even the slightly improved
combined movement were forced to give way to some method more rapidly
executed. Whole arm movement also proved inadequate. The method that
has made the commercialization of penmanship possible is that of
muscular movement. By this method only are the fingers relieved from
furnishing the power which should rightly come from the large muscles
of the arm. Muscular movement, as applied to writing, is a rotary
motion with the large muscles of the forearm for a center while the
fingers, though not held rigid, are not permitted any movement of their
own. This movement takes place from the shoulder, the pivotal point,
with the weight of the arm resting on the desk. Muscular movement
method does not emphasize prescribed forms so much as proper method of
execution.

It is no special wonder that the leading educators of the day are now
investigating penmanship. Changing from the slant to vertical, and now
again to the slant, what is the average teacher to conclude? What shall
she teach indeed if she is convinced at all regarding any system of
penmanship, or is qualified to teach any method?

The person who makes practical use of penmanship, the one who uses it
to help him earn his daily bread, points the way. It matters not if
he calls it muscular movement or if he ever saw a penmanship teacher.
Watch such a person and observe his method. Observation will reveal
that practically all use what we term a muscular movement slant method.
It takes the practical person only a short time to discover the method
that will best conserve energy, economize time, and, above all, lead
to writing which will prove readable and attractive. It is a method of
such character as fulfills all necessary requirements and thus proves
the useful tool.

Because we are a practical people, the public is now looking forward
to results from the formal writing lesson. Teachers should expect the
same degree of excellence to come from penmanship instruction as from
correct teaching of mathematics, history, reading, or any other subject
in the curriculum.

It has been remarked many times that commercial schools and business
men have put the stamp of approval upon the muscular-movement-slant
method rather than upon any other. The reason is obvious. In fact,
commercial schools have been the missing link between the oft-times
theoretical public school and the actual business world. Commercial
schools have found it possible during their short course of six or
eight months to give our elementary school pupils an asset that the
public schools have failed to bestow in as many years.

With the present day crowded curriculum it has been found necessary
to adopt some method by which the time consumed in the preparation of
the written lessons might be shortened. Again muscular movement slant
method came to the rescue, this time to the elementary school pupils.

There is a certain amount of energy available in the nervous system.
Discreet use of this energy is a lesson dearly bought by many. The
automatic writing habit conserves energy and prevents diffusion of
effort. In writing one’s thoughts, the mind should be occupied only
in rendering the thought into correct English. To be truly useful the
art of writing must finally be done with the muscles and not with brain
energy. That we may save any draught on the intellectual power we
should be entirely unconscious of the execution of the forms.

Men are constantly at work in the business world devising schemes
whereby energy and time may be economized. Cannot the schools do their
share in this great scheme for the betterment of humanity? We should
teach pupils an energy-saving manner of expressing themselves upon
paper. How much useless nerve force is applied daily by pupils of all
ages in forcing the pen along with the fingers in such a way that it is
only less painful to the observer than to the performer? Why not try
to assist in ending this useless waste of energy in the school world
by directing a reasonable amount of energy into the correct channel?
How much of our energy is misdirected daily when we should be making
it our ally? We should fund and capitalize all energy, and at last
live at ease upon the interest. The more details we can hand over to
automatism, the more our higher powers of mind will be set free for
greater work.

Children are the nation’s most valuable asset. Vision is the first
faculty in order of importance. How can it be best conserved? A proper
regard for the future usefulness of the eyes of the pupils requires
that a departure be made from the method now prevalent of demanding so
much written work. A keen observer who realizes the true nature of a
child will postpone the requirement of written language and fine print
reading until a time when the more delicate eye muscles are properly
developed and able to stand the strain. Muscular movement writing makes
conservation of vision possible because it demands first, last and
always, correct posture and proper lighting.

Nearsight is frequently brought on by straining the eyes to see
objects, and especially small blackboard writing, at a distance. Light
shining on the board causes a glare, and when pupils are sitting so
that the work on the board is seen at a trying angle the result is
harmful to the eye. All work placed on the board during a penmanship
demonstration, or at any other time, should be executed large enough
and with lines so bold that pupils in the rear of the room may see it
plainly without eye strain.

Correct posture while writing precludes a tendency toward curvature
of the spine, and also saves the eyes unnecessary strain. Numberless
people sit and write more hours than they walk or ride. Who would
presume to question the value of correct posture while walking, in
its relation to good health? We are painfully inconsistent, when the
writing habit is in operation, with regard to many of the laws that
make for good health.

Only as we work toward the saving of energy for ourselves and others
are we keeping step with the progressives who are teaching conservation
from the kitchen to forestry. Surely our aim should be the greatest
accomplishment with the least expenditure of energy.


ECONOMY OF TIME A RESULT OF THE SOLUTION

Second only in importance to conserving the health by economizing
energy through muscular movement is the time saving element. People
who would recoil from ordinary thieving are often guilty of dishonesty
of a kind that is closely akin thereto. We joke over our own poor
handwriting and moan over that of our friends, yet we would be greatly
startled were we actually to compute the number of priceless hours
wasted every day by busy people trying to decipher illegible writing.
Not only time but temper as well is destroyed. Quite as painful, only
less annoying, to the economist of time is the accurately drawn script
that we know consumed fully three times as much time as should have
been required for its execution.

In many schools we find that the method of executing written lessons is
not equal to the need. Then also, we have pupils taking several times
as long as should be required for written spelling or composition.
Muscular movement will reduce several fold the time necessary for all
written work and the benefits will not end there, for better quality in
the content will result. The pupil will be left free to dictate and the
hand will obey quite unconsciously.

We constantly hear the plea, “We cannot teach writing; we have not the
time.” Would it not be well to make some computations at this point?
Compare a class or school that uses a good muscular movement, acquired
through a formal writing lesson of from twenty to thirty minutes daily,
with a class in which penmanship is hit or miss. The latter irregular
habit always results in an irregular slant and finger movement. Judge
then if it would not be well to teach pupils to save time. We carefully
consider how to minimize waste of energy in a machine. Is the human
machine of less importance?

Since penmanship is used largely as a vehicle for expression to convey
the mental product to others, is it not reasonable that we employ the
easiest and speediest method of transportation? It is convenient to be
master of a method that can record thought as fast as the mind shapes
it. The right method will aid thought, not impede it.

Henry Maxwell, as a workman, began to study the length of time he
required to each part of a job. He kept a record and studied it. He
then busied himself seeing where he could cut down all unnecessary
strokes. He found that on a certain six hour job all but two hours
and forty-seven minutes were consumed by bad planning, poor tools,
and needless movements. Maxwell, as a master craftsman, is one of the
all too rare people who are setting things in order. Everything can
be provided more easily as a result of the work of a man like him. He
opens up the possibility of leisure through the saving of labor.

Assuming that not more than five or ten minutes were saved by the pupil
during each written lesson, think of the total saving per day, per
week, per month, not to mention the saving of time to that same man or
woman when his school life is over and school of real life begins.




CHAPTER FOUR PREPARATION OF THE TEACHER


THE TECHNIQUE OF THE SUBJECT

To fit oneself from year to year for the ever increasingly difficult
task of teaching is a serious problem. We are to some extent
compensated in a material way; our chief payment, however, is in
the consciousness that through newly acquired knowledge our methods
are improved, and the reflection is mirrored in the quality of our
work. That methods presuppose a knowledge of the subject matter, is
necessarily as true in the science of muscular movement penmanship as
in other subjects less homely and less practical. The indispensable
accompaniment is inspiring instruction suited to the inculcation
of the proper habit on the part of the class. Too often we forget
that anything that is worth possessing is paid for in strokes of
daily effort. By neglecting the necessary concrete labor, by sparing
ourselves the daily effort, we are standing in the way of obtaining the
desired final results.

All will agree that results speak. Shall we not then be repaid for
our trouble when pupils mirror the reflection of our labor? Having
personally mastered the difficulties of the subject, the teacher and
supervisors are aware of the pitfalls which await the pupils. Only then
do we cease to be theorists and become capable of demonstrating the
truth of our methods. Uniformly good results may be obtained in almost
any class if proper instructions are followed. If we are not obtaining
good results in the product our methods are at fault. Could a teacher
without knowledge of reading or of numbers devise suitable methods for
presenting reading or numbers? Surely, the teacher cannot teach that
which he does not know, be the subject penmanship or astronomy. Neither
is the ambitious teacher content with a partial knowledge of any
subject. Unless intensive knowledge of a subject obtains, no teacher
will be able to follow successfully second hand methods.

It is significant that the Normal Schools require their graduates to
qualify in the useful art of practical penmanship. Many teachers have
found that the correspondence method is well suited to and fulfills
their needs for a complete penmanship training. Universities now offer
summer courses in penmanship. Supervisors frequently give weekly drill
classes for unqualified teachers upon which attendance is obligatory or
optional. It is the regret of many of our best teachers who have been
in the service for some years that they did not have opportunity or
were not required to qualify in penmanship earlier in their educational
career. Unless an inexperienced teacher knows how to teach intuitively,
ludicrous blunders will be made. If knowledge be lacking regarding any
branch, the quality of the young teacher’s work will be still less
desirable. The everlasting _how_ will confront the teacher every day,
and each time it will be necessary to find an answer.

It is unfortunate for our schools that so many teachers feel that they
can succeed in teaching penmanship without themselves knowing how to
write. To know only the first few principles will not be sufficient,
though they are not to be underestimated. To complete the structure
we must build upon the firm foundation of first principles a crude
but proper framework. When this is firmly reinforced, we put on the
finishing touches. Many do not get further than the foundation; others
stop at the next important stage, the crude product; while others who
are persevering work to the end and have the satisfaction of enjoying
the beautiful structure complete.


THE ABILITY TO SECURE RESULTS

There are few successful teachers who are not good psychologists and
who therefore do not know the process by which growth is secured.
Knowledge is the cornerstone of the foundation. However it is not
enough that we know the subject which we are to teach; we must have the
ability to impart knowledge that the self-activity of the pupils may
induce growth.

All teachers are not endowed alike with this wonderful gift. It is
also a truism that to realize one’s shortcomings in this direction is
the first step. If the pupils are not interested, and response cannot
be obtained, let us look for the direct cause in the teacher and for
the indirect cause in the supervisor. The far seeing teacher will aim
to surround the penmanship lesson with the proper atmosphere at the
outset. As pupils are more interested in seeing what is done than by
abstract explanation, a few skillful and telling strokes at the desk
or on the blackboard will serve as a much greater inspiration than for
the pupils to come into the room and sit before a model that has been
executed while they were out of sight.

Skillful questioning and holding the entire class for answers is
of great advantage when visualizing letter forms, and again when
criticising and comparing results. The laws of cause and effect operate
in penmanship as surely as they operate elsewhere. What is the cause
of incorrect slant, a heavy stroke or a careless form? Pupils who know
how to think may be put on the right road by being taught to criticize
their own work.

It is one thing to impart the knowledge one may possess of correct
execution; the obtaining of results is quite another. Many a teacher
has been greatly discouraged when a view of the results was obtained
because close observation revealed that pupils had not comprehended the
idea which the teacher intended to convey. Let us adopt new methods or
modify old ones until desirable results are obtained. The pupils are
placed under our care that they may have an opportunity to gain some of
the knowledge and skill of which we, as teachers, are supposed to be in
possession.

The best proof that the imparting has been clear, logical, and
effective is in the quality of the results so easily observed in the
penmanship class. Every lesson is a new record of what has already been
grasped by the pupils or a presentation of something new, or better
still, a combination of both. Enthusiasm is one of the most essential
points to be gained by the class. It must actually be experienced
before it can be imparted to the pupil. If it is not felt by the
teacher the next duty is to induce it by look and act.

The unconscious influence of the teacher cannot be measured. With
pupils, teachers are more than ideals; they are realities. The
personal influence is more lasting than the particular system that
is taught. A competent teacher must be the master of the situation.
Little inspiration can be created by the timid teacher. Originality,
individuality, attractive personality, courage, confidence, ease of
manner, firmness, tact, initiative--these are desirable assets for the
penmanship leader. Such a leader has a ready following.

A penmanship teacher must balance enthusiasm with tact, system, and
resourcefulness, and be ever on the alert to discover the individual
needs. Tact plays a very important part in penmanship instruction for
by the exercise of it we are led to say and do the right thing at the
right time.

True, we get no more out of this subject than we put into it. Let
us be more pedagogical in imparting this subject. Let us outline a
penmanship lesson as carefully as we would other lessons. The result
will justify the labor.


THE PENMANSHIP PERSPECTIVE

Penmanship is entirely too isolated, and the value of cooperation and
correlation are not sufficiently recognized. Young America demonstrated
this perfectly when at the beginning of a written spelling test he
asked if he should write it with muscular movement or with his “real
writin’.” To him the drill that was supposed to make for the correct
writing habit had not taken hold. He failed to associate the practice
method with practical work. Again, great tact must be exercised in the
attempt to correlate the penmanship with other subjects, lest in an
unguarded moment a teacher may tire the pupils and thus defeat the much
sought-for end.

Colonel Parker says: “The present trend of study, investigation, and
discovery in the science of education is toward the correlation and
unification of educative subjects and their concentration upon human
development. All subjects, means and modes of study are concentrated
under this doctrine upon the economization of educative effort.”

Persistence on the part of the teacher is absolutely essential, for
pupils will forget and must be constantly reminded. If on all occasions
the teacher of English or other subjects will bring a due amount of
pressure to bear upon the class during all written recitations and take
the proper share of responsibility, good results will be rapidly noted.
On the other hand, we should have scant respect for the penmanship
teacher who habitually uses poor English and who is not pedagogical in
the presentation of the subject.

Since it is common to evaluate subjects in terms of credits, would not
a system of daily credits in writing tend to dignify the subject? Would
not this react upon the pupil in a desirable way? As the matter now
stands in many schools no credit is given to encourage; only complaints
are heard when the work is not up to standard.

We do know that all pupils who enter the commercial department of our
public schools soon take it for granted that penmanship is a part of
their stock in trade. The laws of necessity are plainly followed. These
pupils have credits for penmanship.

In the requirements for good penmanship, consistency should be
shown from the lowest to the highest. The closest cooperation from
the superintendent down to the first grade teacher is urged. Set a
standard, and bring the pupils up to it, as is done in other subjects.
One grade teacher may teach well, another poorly or indifferently, and
thus the pupils are passed along. The school system where this prevails
may be compared to a chain with now and then a weak link. Unless there
is unity and cooperation among teachers the subject suffers greatly.
The right kind of supervision is helpful, but it cannot accomplish all
things. Not infrequently we hear the remark, “I am not the penmanship
teacher; Miss So-and-so teaches all the penmanship.” Our “second
speech” is too important a matter to be left to one person unaided.
Upon whose shoulders shall be placed the responsibility? If a school
does remarkably excellent or noticeably poor work in any subject, whose
is the reward or the blame?

The proper attitude of the Superintendent and the principal will go
far to popularize any subject, penmanship no less than any other. This
attitude will be reflected unconsciously upon the teacher, and the
pupils will be quick to take the cue.

How often is the muscular movement writing supervisor told by the
boys in particular, “My father writes that way.” The right attitude
is established immediately because the boy sees the relation of the
school to a practical need. In fact, parental influence is a factor to
be reckoned with in penmanship and the thoughtful teacher will do well
to inquire into the attitude of the parents toward this useful art.
Many times it means leverage for the teacher. In case the pupil is old
enough to realize a motive for improving, the influence of the teacher
alone may be sufficient. On the other hand, the boy frequently decides
to follow the occupation or trade of his father, without regard to
capacity or aptitude. Vocational guidance is essential.

In the consideration of this subject, by parents, superintendents,
principals, and teachers, let us not forget that we are living in a
rapidly changing age, that we should ever be on the alert to study the
present day needs, and that an open mind is essential to progress.




CHAPTER FIVE SUITABLE EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS


TEXT

When the conclusion has been reached that some muscular movement system
should be followed in order to inculcate the best writing habit, it
still remains to select the text. Great care should be taken in this.
A satisfactory text should abound in instructions to be read until
fully understood, and illustrated with a sufficient number of models to
answer all purposes of visualization. The text should be of convenient
size; the drills and cuts should be arranged in a logical manner. The
instructions should be in such simple language that all pupils can
comprehend them. A manual with model forms only for the lower grades
would prove very helpful, the teacher supplying the instruction. First
grade pupils should write on the blackboard, but only from correct
models placed there by the teacher in the presence of the pupils. Many
primary grade educators favor no writing in the first grade except
such as is taught from the board.

She would be far more than an ordinary teacher who could give a class
of pupils (without the help of a text) the pictures in her own mind in
a sufficiently clear and vivid manner to result in correctly executed
work on the part of the pupil. Surely all reasonable aids should be
given pupils in their efforts to learn penmanship. A good text is as
much needed in this as in any other subject. We should laugh at the
idea of teaching arithmetic or English without the aid of the text; yet
many good school people seem to think writing can be absorbed in some
mysterious manner from more or less indefinite word pictures and a few
blackboard copies done in a more or less skillful manner.

Again we hear of schools that arrogate unto themselves the right
to change the author’s plan, or to accept it in part, frequently
omitting the most important and vital points. There is no unity and no
consistency in this manner of doing things. McMurray’s question and
answer along this line is pertinent when he says, “What should be the
attitude of the young student toward the authorities that he studies?”
The answer is, “Certainly, authors are, as a rule, more mature and far
better informed upon the subjects that they discuss than he, otherwise
he would not be pursuing them.”


BLACKBOARD AND THE USE OF IT

Much may be said for and against the use of the blackboard. At best,
it cannot supplant the use of the text. To begin with, the blackboard
models are liable to be executed hurriedly and therefore poorly; and
again these models, however correct, are not seen by all at the same
angle. A slate or glass board is to be preferred. This should be placed
low enough for all pupils to reach easily. All wall space, including
that between the windows, should be utilized for blackboard. When
pupils are copying writing from the board the window shades should be
adjusted in such a manner that the pupils’ eyes do not suffer from the
glare.

Good blackboard writing on the part of the teacher points its own
moral. The teacher has less teaching to do. Pupils imitate almost
every school room procedure from the teacher’s dress and mannerisms
to her writing. Fortunately it is much easier to write well upon the
blackboard than upon paper and no possible excuse can be offered that
will cover poor board writing on the part of either teacher or pupil.

Good work on the board serves as an attraction to the subject since the
pupils are always interested in seeing the creation of a skillful hand.
It is also indispensable in studying the construction of letters and
the teacher who can execute freely and rapidly at the board possesses
a most valuable asset. When proper visualization has taken place,
that is, when the mental photograph has been acquired by exposing the
lens of the eye sufficiently long, it is well to erase the model or
constructive lines and refer to the models in the text, since these are
what the pupil will aim to approach. All work placed upon the board
should be in exact harmony with the system in use at the writing hour,
since example is more than precept and pupils gain unconsciously by
seeing the correct forms before them.

[Illustration: BLACKBOARD POSITION]

Just as we have pictures that exert a correct moral influence hung
in the rooms and halls, and mottoes containing beautiful sentiments
ever before us, so should we place the correct written forms before
the pupil. Again, note the effect of regular written work done in an
incorrect manner! Pupils will be very apt to draw the conclusion that
the models used during the writing lesson and real work are two
different matters. Frequently the grade teacher will apologize to the
supervisor for the appearance of the copy. This does not raise her in
the estimation of her class, but rather calls their attention to her
short-comings. By spending a few minutes daily for a month any teacher
may develop such excellent blackboard work that no apologies should be
necessary.

Pupils who are discouraged in penmanship will find that good results
may be obtained very easily at the board. They must be taught at the
outset, however, that the movement at the board and that required
at the seat is quite different. Form, rhythm, and slant should be
developed first at the board, as these three points _are_ in common. By
listening to the teacher’s criticism of blackboard results, pupils will
easily become more critical of their own work.

Points to be observed in a blackboard lesson:

1. The teacher should be able to make for each pupil a correct copy in
the presence of the class.

2. Pupils should stand with the left side turned slightly toward the
board to insure slant writing, and prepare to write as high as the
eyes. Make movement for the exercises in the air yet almost touching
the copy first, in order to gain correct size and spacing.

3. All pupils should write to the teacher’s count or dictation. Require
much concert work at the board. Keep the lips closed and thus avoid
breathing dust from the crayon. Hold the crayon between the thumb, and
first and second fingers, allowing the end not in contact with the
board to extend toward the center of the palm.

4. Straight strokes and ovals on correct slant will serve as a basis
upon which to build all letters and words. Pupils should step along
with the work as it is executed on the board, and thus keep correct
alignment.

5. Pupils should be taught to do board work carefully, whether it be a
writing exercise or regular work. Develop all difficult new drills at
the board first. Suppose the class numbers forty; allow twenty to pass
to the board for a ten minute period, if twenty minutes is the time
allotted for a writing lesson. The groups at the seats should be taught
to do the counting for or with the teacher, also to be alert for all
errors in posture, slant and form.

6. It is very important that the line should be made strong enough that
it may be seen easily from the rear of the room without eye strain. The
writing should be large enough to be seen easily from any point in the
room.

7. When erasing use a downward stroke. Lift the eraser on the upward
stroke. This allows the dust to drop in the trough; a good signal is,
“Erase,” “Lift,” “Erase,” “Lift,” or “Down,” “Lift,” “Down,” “Lift.”


PAPER

“A workman is known by his tools.” It is as essential that good
material be supplied for the penmanship as that any other department
be well supplied as regards quality and quantity. Not only should good
paper, pencils, pens and ink be used during the formal lessons each
day, but in every lesson wherein writing is used to carry on the other
work. Permit no scribbling, utilize every line, keep paper in neat
folders; thus economize in the right manner, and not by the purchase of
poor equipment, which is an irritation to teacher and pupil alike. The
difference in cost of good and poor material is slight when compared
with the results.

Paper should be of such quality that the pen will not pick up the
fiber and cause blots. The proper ruling for penmanship paper is
three-eighths of an inch (26 points). Size of letters and space between
letters will be more easily developed by the use of the ruling
suggested than by the use of unruled paper. Only in upper grades where
good work obtains should an attempt be made to use unruled paper for
the writing lesson. Size of sheets for lower grades should be not more
than six by eight inches. Upper grades may use a sheet eight by ten and
one-half inches. Writing on thick tablets should not be permitted. Use
loose sheets of paper, always having the top sheet padded by one or two
extra ones beneath to save wearing the penpoint needlessly.


FOLDERS

Each pupil should have a heavy paper folder in which to keep all
writing material. The use of such a folder saves much time in the
passing of material.


PENCILS

If pencils are used in the first or second grade they should be large,
and cylindrical in form (never octagonal), and of medium soft lead. The
writing period should not be taken up with the sharpening of pencils.
Erasers should not be allowed. Lead pencils are not at best conducive
to movement beyond the ovals and strokes. The use of the cheap tablet,
the bane of the teacher’s life, and the poor quality lead pencil do
much to hinder application of the correct writing habit in the lower
grades.


PENS

A coarse, flexible pen (never a fountain or a stub pen) should be used
by all teachers of muscular movement writing. Pens are dipped in oil
before being boxed; for that reason when taking a new pen it is best to
dampen it and remove the oil. Many a blot will be saved by so doing.
Dip in the ink until the hole in the pen is partly or entirely filled
with ink. When touching to the paper, be sure that both nibs come in
contact, and are made to wear evenly. Each pupil should have his own
pencil or pen, for sanitary reasons, as well as because no two persons
wear a pen in exactly the same manner. After the lesson is ended the
pen should be wiped on a penwiper. Removing the ink, which contains
acid, will cause the pen to last longer, and a clean pen will do better
work than one clogged with sediment. Pupils should never drop the
pen to the bottom of the inkwell in order to get ink; this ruins the
penpoint and causes unnecessary noise. A good penpoint should last
from eight to fourteen hours or longer if properly treated. Inkwells
should be filled frequently.


PENHOLDER

A penholder of wood, or one tipped with cork, is preferred. No learner
should be permitted to use a metal tipped penholder. On account of the
pressure that must be exerted in order to keep the metal penholder from
slipping, proper relaxation of the hand cannot take place. Frequently
the metal rusts or is so heavy that the penholder is a burden to the
inexperienced.


BLOTTER

Each child should be provided with a blotter. It is well to let the ink
dry as the pen spreads it on the paper except in case of a blot. Many
pupils have the habit of taking the blotter in the hand and of giving
the page a series of slaps with it, in quick succession; instead of
taking up the ink this merely blurs the page. The correct way is to
place the blotter on the line, give it an even pressure, and lift it,
never moving it while the pressure is being applied.


INK

Use the best fluid ink obtainable. Ink made from crystals or powder is
less satisfactory. It should be dark blue or black and flow freely.
Bottles and inkwells should be kept closed when not in use. If the air
is excluded the ink does not thicken. Occasionally water may be added,
but great care must be taken in reducing ink that it be not made too
thin.


ECONOMY IN THE USE OF MATERIAL

School boards and officials are generally willing to procure good
supplies if economy is practiced in the use of them. For the sake
of uniformity, and that every child may have an equal chance, it is
advisable for the school to furnish all material for writing. Pupils
frequently do not use proper discrimination in their purchases, when
the matter of supplies is left to them.

Lastly, it is a mistake to think that good results can be obtained
with poor material. In building any structure that we hope to last a
lifetime we are careful to supply ourselves with the best of material.
This principle applies in rearing the penmanship structure.




CHAPTER SIX SOME WORKABLE SUGGESTIONS


HOW TO STUDY

Observe the board demonstration. Trace text correctly: Capitals twelve
times, words six times and sentences three times, at correct speed.
Write at correct speed one-half minute, one minute, or two minutes as
required. Compare with models. Test and grade.

How to study capital letters: Height, three-fourths space high; slant,
same as strokes; width, wider or narrower than single ovals; beginning
stroke, how and where; end stroke, how and where; speed of letter
studied; name a variety of counts and select the most pleasing; analogy
to other letters; name as many points as can be observed that are
peculiar to the letter under discussion.

How to study words and sentences: Slant must be the same as strokes;
letters must be of uniform height; space between letters uniform and
equal to an oval of the same relative size as the small letter; end
strokes curve upward; beginning strokes start under end of strokes of
previous word; study especially the most difficult letter.


HOW TO MOVE AND SLANT THE PAPER

Check each line for capitals into thirds, place four or five letters in
a third; move paper to the left about two inches at each check mark,
at the same time say aloud, “Move.” At the end of the line say, “New
line.” This should be the invariable rule during the concert count.
This makes for uniformity of slant; it gives the class a chance to
help, and relieves the teacher. In making four hundred ovals, say
“Move,” at each quarter. Slant the paper so that the line written upon
runs from corner to corner of the desk.

Second grade: Check in middle, and move paper once only. Second and
third grades make two hundred ovals and strokes per line.


BLACKBOARD WORK OF THE PUPILS

(Explained in detail in Chapter Five.) Pupils affected: first and
second grades especially. On Monday all poor writers in any grade work
at the board and perfect the new letters or sentence for the week.
Suggested procedure for any grade:

Place a model (two in lower grades) for each pupil.

Demonstrate briefly the letter.

Class face board, trace with right forefinger, teacher and class
counting.

Trace with chalk, six or more times. Erase.

Make drill to count.

Class criticize and answer questions.

Introduce simple test lines to prove to class that work measures up to
standard.

Personal help.

Upper grade pupils should not spend more than one-half to two-thirds
of the period at the board, then they should go directly to seats and
make the good forms just learned function on paper. In all applied work
at the board, hold pupils equally as responsible for correct forms and
neat legible writing as in seat writing.

Position at the board: Turn the left side slightly toward the board,
allow left hand to hang or to hold the eraser. Write as high as the
eyes. Use signal, “Stand erect,” “Turn,” “Face,” “Down”; the last
signal to be given when the teacher desires to see all the work at the
board.

Good line quality is largely the result of working at correct speed
throughout the drill period, for by so doing even pressure is exerted,
and pleasing quality is the result.

The eraser should be drawn downward from the top line to the groove,
holding it parallel with the groove. This permits the chalk dust to
fall where it should. Lift the eraser and repeat, always drawing from
the top line downward.


NAME CARDS

By the fifth week of school, name cards should be provided for each
pupil. Paste at the ends in front or back of the compendium. (Pasted in
this way they may be easily removed.) Trace names daily at the seats.

First grade children trace names daily at the board until they can be
legibly written.


FIGURES

Figures are to be practiced daily by making from one to two lines of
the date. Figures are one-half space high in the first four grades,
one-third space high in the remaining grades.


ALPHABET

The alphabet should have a place on the board in each room by the end
of the first week of school. It will prove very convenient if the speed
for each letter is placed near in small figures. New and unqualified
teachers may ask the supervisor to place the alphabet on the board the
first term.


ENDURANCE TESTS

Pupils should be taught to compare their work frequently with the
standard penmanship chart, a copy of which should be on the wall of
each room. In this way they are able to rate themselves for quality.
Before the end of the first term pupils should be able to endure a
dictation of words or sentences for one minute, at the proper speed,
with ease and in good posture and with fairly good forms. The seventh
month should find them able to take a two minute endurance test with
greater ease and better forms.


THE “Z” GROUP

The Z group in first and second grades should receive proper
consideration. Above the 2 B it has been demonstrated that the Z
classes, so far as writing is concerned, are not far behind others in
their work. When necessary, cut the content, lower the speed, repeat
more often your instructions, count more, and expect less perfection in
form.


OBJECTIVES IN GOOD WRITING HABITS

_Good posture_: health, appearance, efficiency.

_Speed_: For accuracy and efficiency, both practical needs.

_Spacing_: To relieve the eye, and make easy reading.

_Slant_: To make writing attractive and easy to read.

_Neatness_: To further a civic need.

_Tracing_: To visualize and thereby assist in acquiring correct form.

_Movement drills_: Ovals for curves, strokes for slant, small letters
for traveling movement.


PROGRESS LESSON

_Time_: Friday or the last lesson of the week.

_Conditions_: Class must know how to study. Class must work fairly well
independently. Class must have had all drills demonstrated.

_Method_: Place problems on the board, numbered, not less than two
nor more than four, unless the class is very efficient. Each pupil
starts with No. 1. Teacher passes down aisle, gives a progress check
if work is satisfactory, if not, a criticism. (A rubber stamp marked
“Improving” is very effective.) If checked, pupil takes next drill; if
not he practices the same drill until the teacher comes again. In a
fifteen minute period the teacher can check up the room at least three
times. Those who receive a check every time receive special recognition.

_Object_: To encourage initiative; to impress upon each pupil his rank
in the writing game; to crystallize the week’s work; to give each pupil
an opportunity for individual help.


SEGREGATION

(Explained in detail in Chapter Two.) The teaching of penmanship is
less laborious and more effective when the poor writers are separated
from the good writers. Many pupils need no individual help, but follow
oral instructions easily. They should be allowed to do so, since
independent effort will develop judgment, initiative, industry, and
an appreciation of how to “play the game square.” The segregation of
the poor writers in rows economizes the teacher’s time and energy in
passing about the room, and ultimately allows each pupil to practice
upon the drill he most needs. While the poor writers should never be
considered in disgrace, a legitimate aim should be to get into the good
division on the regular promotion day, preferably Friday.

Segregation is especially desirable for board work, since it economizes
the time and energy of the teacher to a marked degree.


LINE QUALITY

_At the seat_: Make not less than 200 solid two-space ovals or
strokes with one dip of ink. This will make for neatness. Allow no
strike-overs, i. e., patched lines. Correct position of the hand,
correct speed, a limited amount of ink, and a good movement are the
surest remedies for neatness and good line quality. Always use two
sheets of paper in order to obtain the best line quality and save the
pen. Hold pen with hole on top so that both nibs touch the paper, in
order to secure even quality. Hold pen or pencil lightly enough that it
may be slipped out easily from the hand.


SAMPLES

Monthly samples have a place in and above the third grade. Make two
or more samples on the 15th of each month, during the writing period.
Select the best one and place in the manila envelope provided for this
purpose only. Place name of pupil on envelope. Collect at the close of
the period. Place rubber band around them and file in your desk.

_Object_: Teachers may judge the effectiveness of their instruction;
pupils may observe their own improvement; the grade of the pupil is to
be partially based on this work; the supervisor may be able to advise
constructively; the pupil has an opportunity to compete with himself.

_Procedure_: Have paper cut, and sample on board, memorized. Give
warming up exercises of ovals, capital, name, and small _o_ exercise.
Consume five or more minutes in this way. Use your watch, time the
class. Record the speed on the sample. After each sample, relax. Make
two or three, as time permits. Select the best. Discard others. Open
sample envelopes, compare with sample of month before. Give a check of
honor to all who have improved to a marked degree. The first month,
check for better movement, neatness and light line; second month,
size, etc. Always hold for all points before considered. Tell class at
end of checking what in general you see they need, and keep that in
mind during the month. Count the pupils who have two samples and those
who receive checks, ascertain your per cent of improvement and record
it for reference next month. Collect sample envelopes and file in your
desk.

_Caution_: There is no objection to the giving of a day of practice
to the matter contained in the sample during the month if the time
permits; in fact, this would be helpful. However, on the 15th, the
allotted time only should be allowed for writing the sample, which
should proceed in general as above outlined.

_Standard_: Third and fourth grades attain 50% improvement each month.
Fifth and sixth grades should attain 66% improvement each month.
Seventh and eighth grades should attain 75% improvement each month.


PREPARATION FOR REGULAR VISIT OF THE SUPERVISOR

First grade: Two models for every child at board.

Second grade: After the second month a writing lesson saved from the
previous week; after the third month, a spelling lesson.

Third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth and ninth grades: Have on
the desk ready for grading, the following: samples, spelling paper,
language paper.

Give pupils an opportunity to see that all work to be inspected is
ready the day previous to the supervisor’s visit. (For ordinary lessons
one minute is ample time for preparation if folders are kept in good
order.) Placing one lesson of the applied work in the folio each week,
from which the final selection is to be made, will serve to keep the
work uniformly good. This would also provide specimens for those who
might be absent for a particular lesson written expressly for this
purpose.


DESK ARRANGEMENT

                             Aisle

  +---------------------------+ +---------------------------+
  | Oct. Spell.  Sept. Sample | | Sept. Sample  Oct. Spell. |
  |                           | |                           |
  | Oct. Lang.   Oct.  Sample | | Oct.  Sample  Oct. Lang.  |
  +---------------------------+ +---------------------------+


COUNTING

In counting for words repeat the letters at correct speed, sentences
likewise, using great care that the finish is within the time limit. In
pronouncing spelling words to be used during penmanship drill, always
require the class to repeat the words after you before writing. A short
dictated sentence should be managed the same way.


USE OF THE TIMEPIECE

This is as necessary to the good teacher of penmanship as is the
blackboard. By its use is obtained correct speed, alertness on the part
of the teacher, good movement because never too slow, more rhythmical
counting, and more practice accomplished. Use the second hand daily,
until counting becomes automatic and goes forward with the right kind
of speed at all times.


AWARDS

Honor rolls, buttons, certificates, pennants, cups, etc., prove a great
incentive. All competition should be carried on in a friendly manner.


USE OF STANDARD PENMANSHIP TESTS

The research department may very profitably apply the standard tests
throughout the city twice yearly, tabulate the results and publish them
to teachers. From these findings, principals, supervisors, and teachers
will be able to determine what the weaknesses are and find a remedy for
them.




CHAPTER SEVEN SUGGESTIONS FOR THE GRADES, JUNIOR AND SENIOR HIGH SCHOOLS


A GENERAL, NOT A SPECIFIC PLAN

In suggesting this plan no endeavor has been made to be definite,
except in a few essentials. Writing texts and conditions in schools
differ so greatly that this would be impossible. An effort has been
made to build up from the first grade to the last a general plan of
a logical character. Many suggestions made for the second and third
grades could wisely be put into operation, in part, in the higher
grades. It is assumed first that the muscular movement method has been
adopted and that each child has the use of a manual, since that is the
only condition under which an adaptation of these suggestions would be
advisable. This bird’s eye view of the subject is not to be considered
in any respect a “system” of writing, in text book phraseology.

It will be impossible to advantageously adapt the suggested plan unless
a comprehensive knowledge of muscular movement has already been gained
through actual practice on the part of the teacher.


FIRST GRADE

Child nature is spontaneous, active, restless. It prefers objects to
subjects, expression to repression and generality to detail. Writing
is a slow and laborious method of expression compared to speech, and
therefore not well suited to childhood. More oral, and less written
language should be given primary grades. But so long as writing seems
a necessary part of primary education, it should be taught in the most
rational manner. To do this, it is necessary to consider the child, its
capacity to acquire knowledge and skill, and its future welfare, as
concerns health and handwriting.

One very noticeable feature about the activity of childhood is the
exercise of the larger muscles which it invariably involves. The
movements are of the whole body, and not of mere portions of it. The
fundamental muscles and not the delicate and finely coordinated muscles
are employed in all their movements. Such muscles (the accessory) as
are engaged in fine writing, drawing and sewing are developed later.
Especially is this true of the muscles of the eye. Ignorance of these
facts has led to mistakes in training.

The wise teacher will not compel or permit young pupils to follow a
fine copy in writing, but will encourage them to use the blackboard
where abundant opportunity will be given for exercising the larger
muscles. Proper regard for the future usefulness of the eyes of the
child certainly requires that a departure be made from the method now
prevalent of requiring so much written work.

Childhood has been called the language period par excellence, but this
statement has reference to oral and not written forms of speech. Every
teacher knows how easily and rapidly the child gains a vocabulary at
this stage. He learns language by imitation, and the whole epoch of
childhood is, as psychology teaches, and William Wordsworth expresses
it, “one endless imitation.” It therefore behooves the teacher to
neglect, if anything, reading and writing during the early stage of
childhood, and make play and story telling the predominant work in the
years preceding eight.

One of the most difficult as well as one of the most interesting
problems that confronts every first grade teacher is what and how much
of writing we shall do in the first year. Shall we use all our time
teaching form? Shall we teach movement work entirely and let form
alone? Or shall we try a combination of both?

It is unfortunate that many of the courses of study which we must
follow state specifically that when the pupils leave the first grade
they must be able to write all the small letters, capital letters,
words and sentences on paper. Some courses demand that pupils must
do a certain amount of copying. This is very unfortunate, because in
trying to fulfill the requirements of such a course of study any means
available are often resorted to and frequently the methods used are a
great hindrance to the future development of the child, both physically
and mentally.

The following suggestions are offered first grade teachers:

Under proper instruction the pupils will go into the next grade with
the ability to express themselves freely and easily at the blackboard.
It is quite unnecessary and unpedagogical to teach children a habit
that in the course of a few years must be given up entirely; reference
is here made to teaching of finger movement in the first three grades.

_One B grade aim_: To introduce pupils in this grade to all small
letters in short words. To attain an average speed of thirty letters
per minute.

_One A grade aim_: To introduce pupils in this grade to all capital
letter forms in families. To review all small letters in words and
sentences. To attain a speed of thirty-five letters per minute. To
give pupils by the end of the term, a tool for handling spelling and
language in a satisfactory manner at the blackboard.

_Material_: Compendium (optional), crayon, eraser. The blackboard
should be ruled with lines four inches apart beginning at the
bottom and extending six lines in height. Eighteen to twenty
inches is sufficient board space for each child. More practice and
correspondingly better results follow when the entire class is at the
board at one time.

_Length of lesson_: Fifteen minutes daily, five times per week. Place
the period early in the day or just before spelling so that it may
function. Writing is an inter-recitation activity. Practicing the daily
lesson will be found very profitable.

_Demonstration_: Each drill should be demonstrated briefly from one to
three times each day of presentation. Blackboard models for tracing
should be provided for each pupil daily. Good models are a necessity
because of the inconvenience of using compendiums at the board.

_Distribution of time to subject matter_: At the beginning of each term
devote one-half to one-third of the lesson to movement drill. Tracing
and writing consume the remainder of the period. As skill increases
reduce the amount of time to one minute on movement drill and divide
the remainder equally between words and sentences. The board should be
filled ten times during one lesson. _One A_ children should fill the
board once daily with the figure represented in the current date.

_Names_: Pupils should write their names as early as possible in the
term. After the capital “I” has been mastered use the following form
for name practice: “I am (name).”

_Z Group_: This group proceeds at a slower rate of speed, attaining at
the end of the year scarcely thirty letters per minute. More frequent
demonstration is necessary. Use as many two-letter words as possible.
Select words from the reading as far as practicable. More blackboard
work, tracing and rhythmic drill are necessary than in other classes.


SECOND GRADE

Primary teachers are frequently opposed to muscular movement because
it is wholly impossible to obtain the same uniform work (which is
really only useless drawing) as can be obtained by the finger movement
plan. Not until principals, primary supervisors, and superintendents
are willing to tell their primary teachers that they will not look for
beautiful written exercises in these grades, will the teachers of the
first, second, and third grades look with favor upon muscular movement.

We do not expect the primary teacher to produce the finished
mathematicians, readers, historians, or penmen, but such work as is
accomplished should be based on the right foundation. The primary
teacher should be willing to sacrifice her pride in the appearance
of written exercises to the demands of the future environment of the
grown child. In schools where superintendents and teachers insist upon
pupils writing words or sentences on paper very soon after they enter
school little or no advancement can be made in muscular movement.
However, if movement is not taught at an early age much time will be
wasted when the transition is made, which a few extreme persons say
should not take place until the fifth year in school. In the latter
case the pupils have incorrect habits so firmly fixed that it takes the
remaining years in the elementary school to learn to write a creditable
style.

Board work may be continued advantageously daily in the second
grade for a three or four minute period. The writing for the first
month might very profitably be given over to board training to a
large extent, retaining only five or six minutes daily to teach the
physical-training phase of penmanship. Relaxation, correct posture
of the body, feet, hands, and arms at the seat might be accomplished
during the first month.

The next step will be to study the hand and arm, making the preparatory
movement for ovals, and strokes with the hand half open and gliding
on the nails. The five knuckles must be turned toward the ceiling.
Pupils should make the movement freely to the teacher’s count and also
count for themselves in low tones. The teacher might use a book or a
thin board to serve as a desk, with which to illustrate, in order to
establish the proper relation in the child’s mind concerning the desk
and the points of contact. (See detailed directions under posture,
Chapter Two.) Pencil holding is next taught, using the handle end
first, and pointing it half way between the shoulder and the elbow. It
will take a month or more to develop relaxation, correct posture, and
penholding.

_Aim_: First month. To perfect the board writing. To review all
capitals and small letter forms in words and sentences, and attain
greater fluency and a higher degree of perfection in form. To attain a
speed of forty letters per minute, the standard speed for this grade.
To teach the form of the letters so well, that in the seat work next
month when movement is the great problem, form may not need to be
stressed, but will be a resource.

Second month: To develop relaxation, correct posture, movement, and
speed sufficient to prevent finger movement. To apply these fundamental
principles to ovals, a few easy capitals, a limited number of words and
a few short sentences. To make the correct writing habit carry over
into the spelling by the end of the 2 B grade.

_Comparison_: Save one of the pupil’s first lessons in both regular and
applied work to be compared with later ones.

_Material_: Canary paper, cut into half sheets, compendium, pencil,
folio seven by nine inches. Keep only writing material in these folios.

_Length of lesson_: Fifteen minutes daily, five times per week.
Blackboard practice on the daily lesson is suggested as an
inter-recitation activity. Place the writing period early in the day or
prior to the spelling in order that it may function in the applied work.

_Demonstration_: The same directions that are given under first grade
for ruling boards and demonstration procedure will be found useful.

_Z Group_: This group proceeds at a slower rate of speed than other
groups and attains at the end of the 2 A a speed of thirty or more
letters per minute instead of forty. Demonstrate more frequently. Use
as many two-letter words as possible. Select words from the reading as
far as practicable. More blackboard work, tracing and rhythmic drill
are necessary than in other classes.

_Distribution of time to subject matter_: During the first month give
the greater part of the writing period to movement drills. For the
following months spend one-half to one-third of the period on movement
drills, the remainder being divided between capital letters and words
and sentences.

_Headings_: Use the following heading daily, placing it on the second
blue line. Write on every line except the first below the heading.
Model:

  John Brown, 2 A, Sept. 15, 1924.


THIRD GRADE

We will assume that all pupils so far advanced as the third grade
are able to make all the letter forms easily and can write words and
sentences upon the board. They should also be able to make straight
strokes and ovals, write words, sentences, and the most necessary
capitals with the right movement, at the seats. In both cases they
should observe correct posture, slant, speed, uniformity, and spacing
between words. They should recognize the difference between connective
lines, and observe the following rule for spacing between letters and
words: The space between letters should be the width of the distance
between the down strokes in small _u_, the space between words should
be the entire width of small _i_.

Doctor Ayres has proved by comparing many specimens that one of the
greatest drawbacks to legibility rests in the fact that the letters are
crowded together. It would be better to allow extreme spacing rather
than to permit the pupils to huddle the letters together using barely
half as much space between letters as they should. The space around the
letters relieves the eye of the reader, and makes even irregular and
crudely formed words fairly legible. The pupils who have been well
trained in movement can slide easily from one letter to another with
the right-length connective stroke.

Pupils at the beginning of the third year in school will often appear
to have forgotten much that they have been taught in penmanship, as in
other subjects. During the vacation the muscles have become somewhat
tense, therefore relaxing exercises should be given frequently in order
to regain what has been lost. (See directions under physical training
phase, Chapter Two.) It will be well to give at least one week’s
practice at the board, two short lessons daily. Review the letter
forms, ending each lesson with a word. The second week have pupils take
pens a few minutes daily and review ovals and strokes, preliminary to
writing the exercises that will lead directly to word and sentence
building.

_Aim_: To develop relaxation, correct posture, easy movement,
sufficient speed to prevent finger movement, and to apply these
fundamental principles to all writing lessons, spelling and copy work.
The grade is to be based upon whether or not the pupil uses the arm
movement during penmanship, copy work and spelling. Grade “Failure” if
movement is not used as above directed. Attain a speed of fifty letters
per minute in words and sentences.

_Material_: Compendium, white paper half sheets, coarse pen, penholder,
ink, penwiper, blotter, manila envelope for sample, folio, seven by
nine inches, in which penmanship material only is to be kept. Teachers
should write pupils’ names on folios. On Mondays pass enough paper for
the week.

_Length of lesson_: Fifteen minutes daily, five times per week. After
correct habits are established, encourage home practice. Place the
penmanship period early in the day or prior to the spelling in order
that it may function properly.

_Distribution of time to subject matter_: During the first month
give one-half or more of the time to good habit formation by use of
movement drills. For the following months spend one-third of the period
on ovals, little _o_, or the like, one-third on capital letters, and
one-third on words and sentences.

_Heading_: Place the following heading daily on the second blue line.
Write on every line except the first below the heading. Model:

  John Brown, 3 B, Sept. 15, 1924.

_Sample_: Memorize the following sample which is to be taken the middle
of each month. Model:

  John Brown, 3 B, Sept. 15, 1924.

  John Doe School
  City, State.
  (Skip a line.)
  I use a free swing
  I use a free swing
  I use a free swing


FOURTH GRADE

The demand for more and better written work will become practically
imperative in the fourth year. The child will be able to meet the
demand because he will have nothing to undo, having spent all the time
devoted to penmanship in working on a correct foundation. The efforts
may be crude. However, technique in the beginning is of less importance
than that the proper habits may be established. It will be necessary
for the teacher of this grade to require of the pupils all that has
been required before and to improve upon what has been done.

_Aim_: To develop relaxation, correct posture, easy movement,
sufficient speed to prevent finger movement and to apply these
fundamental principles to all writing lessons, spelling, and copy
work. The grade is to be based upon whether or not the pupil uses arm
movement during the penmanship period, copy work, and spelling. Grade
“Failure” if movement is not used as above directed. Attain a speed of
sixty letters per minute in words and sentences.

_Materials_: Compendium, white paper half sheets, coarse pen,
penholder, ink, penwiper, blotter, manila envelopes for samples, folio
seven by nine inches in which writing material only is to be kept.
Teacher should label folios with name of pupil. On Monday pass enough
paper for the week.

_Length of lesson_: Twenty minutes daily, five times per week. After
correct habits are established encourage home practice. Place the
writing period early in the day or prior to the spelling in order that
it may function properly.

_Distribution of time to subject matter_: During the first month give
one-half or more of the time to good habit formation by use of movement
drills. For the remainder of the year spend one-third of the period on
ovals, little _o_ drill, and the like, one-third on capital letters and
one-third on words and sentences.

_Heading_: Place the following heading daily on the second blue line.
Write on every line except the first below the heading. Model:

  John Brown, 4 B, Sept. 15, 1924

_Sample_: Memorize the following sample which is to be made the middle
of each month. Model:

  John Brown, 4 B, Sept. 15, 1924
  John Doe School
  City, State
  (Skip a line)
  I use a free swing
  I use a free swing
  I use a free swing


FIFTH GRADE

Since pupils in the fifth grade are better developed mentally and
physically than those in the preceding grade we may reasonably expect
a better quality of penmanship from them. In this grade especially,
pupils should be taught to work independently, that is, correctly
without the guidance of the teacher. They cannot go on forever with a
supporting prop. It is marvelous how much they will develop if led to
become independent. By way of assisting them, give pupils a study plan
and a small portion of the lesson time, perhaps two minutes, during
which time make mental note of the points neglected by the majority
of the class. With this as a basis to work upon make the next lesson
strong on the points in which the pupils, when working independently,
seem the weakest. If pupils have established the correct habits a
half-hour of practice at home or at school should not weary them. Many
will practice longer of their own accord.

_Aim_: To develop relaxation, correct posture, easy movement, and
sufficient speed to prevent finger movement and to apply these
fundamental principles to all penmanship lessons, spelling, copy, and
dictation work. Grade “Failure” unless movement is used as indicated
above. Attain a speed of seventy letters per minute in words and
sentences.

_Material_: Compendium, full size sheets of white paper, ink, blotter,
heavy brown folios, nine by twelve inches, coarse pen, wooden
penholder, pen-wiper, manila envelope for samples. Keep writing
material only in these folios. Teacher should label folios with the
name of the pupil. Monday pass to each pupil enough paper for the week.

_Length of lesson_: Twenty minutes daily, five times per week. Place
the writing period early in the day or prior to the spelling in order
that it may function in applied work.

_Distribution of time to subject matter_: During the first month spend
half or more of the time in developing posture, movement, and movement
drills. After the first month devote to movement drills, ovals, little
letters and the like, one-third to one-fourth of the period; to capital
letters, half the remaining time; to words or sentences the remainder
of the period.

_Heading_: Place on the second blue line. Write on every line except
the first below the heading. Model:

  John Brown, 5 B, Sept. 15, 1924

_Sample_: Take sample on the middle of each month. Memorize. Model:

  John Brown, 5 B, Sept. 15, 1924
  John Doe School
  City, State
  (Skip a line)
  ABCDEFGHIJKLM
  NOPQRSTUVWXYZ
  (Skip a line)
  This is a sample of my best writing
  This is a sample of my best writing
  This is a sample of my best writing


SIXTH GRADE

As classes pass from grade to grade, with each member accomplishing
what he should according to his grade, by the time they reach the
sixth, the correct writing habit should be firmly fixed. It is well to
have it so, for now, more than ever before does the pupil have need of
this energy and time saving habit. The demands for the application of
the writing habit are daily growing more numerous.

The penmanship lesson should now be devoted largely to further study
of good letter forms, providing pupils automatically use muscular
movement. Pupils of this age will now recognize what the former
training means. They will now be interested because they realize that
they have been gaining something that will be very useful to them.

_Aim_: To develop relaxation, correct posture, easy movement, and
sufficient speed to prevent finger movement and to apply fundamental
principles to all written exercises except arithmetic. Grade “Failure”
unless movement is used as indicated above. Attain a speed of eighty
letters per minute in words and sentences.

The material, length of lesson, distribution of time to subject
matter, heading and samples may profitably be the same as for the fifth
grade.


SEVENTH GRADE

In a school where each teacher has done her share of the work outlined
according to the grade it will be observed that the quality of the
penmanship produced by seventh grade pupils will in many cases equal
that of adults. Adult learners, if they have in previous years used
finger movement will have more to overcome than seventh grade pupils.

It is well at all times to keep the goal in view, and gradually work
toward it. Never permit pupils to drift. During penmanship lessons
frequent comparisons with the models is essential. Friendly competition
has a place. Let parallel grades of the same school or neighboring
schools compare work. Take into consideration in the competition,
first, legibility, then time consumed for the execution of the
exercise, uniformity, slant, spacing, size and connecting and ending
strokes.

Many pupils no doubt do not use discretion in the selection of proper
equipment for home work. They should realize that the right heights
of table and chair mean much for comfort and therefore have direct
relation to physical endurance. The use of the timepiece in order to
keep up the right speed is an important point. Every exercise in the
manual practiced at the right rate of speed will enable seventh grade
pupils to acquire an average speed of fifteen to eighteen words per
minute. Teach each pupil to be systematic in his homework as well as at
school.

In this grade it is interesting at times to allow a pupil who has
a sense of rhythm in penmanship well developed to play the piano,
selecting a march to which the pupils might write certain drills. The
phonograph may be used to good advantage for the purpose of giving
variety to the drill work. Pupils will enjoy writing the drills to the
music. They must appreciate more fully than ever the fact that each
school subject depends to a great extent upon others, penmanship being
no exception. The sense of rhythm which should come from the study of
music will often be the inspiration that will move pupils to the right
speed when everything else fails. When pupils write to the rhythm
produced by their own voices, such as concert counting, relaxation of
the muscles takes place easily.

It has proven very satisfactory to appoint a captain, perhaps the best
penman in the row, to do the counting for the preliminary drills with
which each lesson should begin. This relieves the teacher of useless
voice work and helps to develop initiative on the part of the pupils.
It will be necessary for pupils who do this work to count exactly
right, first with the teacher, and later alone. They should next learn
to count and work at the same time.

Finally, pupils may well observe all the suggestions made in previous
grades. They should, however, be able to produce much more finished
results than in the previous grade.

_Aim_: To develop relaxation, correct posture, easy movement,
sufficient speed to prevent finger movement, and to apply these
fundamental principles to all written exercises. Grade “Failure” unless
movement is applied as indicated above. Attain a speed of ninety
letters in words and sentences.

_Length of lesson_: Twenty minutes daily, three to five times per week.
The material, distribution of time to subject matter, heading and
samples may profitably be the same as for the fifth grade.


EIGHTH GRADE

It now remains for the eighth grade teacher to receive the pupils who
have been for the last seven years building among other useful habits
the penmanship structure. The writing is perhaps one of the first
subjects to be criticized or commented upon when the class is promoted.
The evidence will be plainly for or against it.

It is a common occurrence for a piano pupil after discontinuing
practice to refuse to perform. An athlete out of practice is an awkward
figure when getting back into form. Therefore, as penmanship is applied
physical training it is not surprising that pupils who do not keep up
practice to a reasonable extent soon lose skill. If the daily practice
must be application to other subjects, and not drill work, great care
should be exercised to make conditions favorable for the retention of
the correct penmanship habit.

It should be the privilege and duty of the pupils of this grade so far
as possible to place all problems, etc., on the board for the teacher.
Pupils of this age should be given every opportunity to use their good
penmanship in any and all kinds of clerical work. They like to feel
that they are helpful, and this spirit should be fostered. It is a
saving of the teacher’s time and strength, and impresses pupils with
the practical value of good writing.

As these pupils pass through the junior high school, the senior high
school, commercial colleges or universities and out into the actual
business world, they will take on that individuality in penmanship
which suits best. The appearance of their writing will be considerably
modified owing to the different conditions under which each one
performs his tasks. This is a matter of minor importance.

The important question for each teacher and each pupil to answer in the
affirmative is this: Is the writing habit acquired in the grades the
correct one? The crown of all the efforts should be an energy and time
saving manner of writing that will be entirely readable.

_Aim_: To develop relaxation, correct posture, easy movement,
sufficient speed to prevent finger movement and to apply these
fundamental principles to all written exercises. Grade “Failure” unless
movement is applied as indicated above. Attain a speed of one hundred
letters in words and sentences.

_Length of lesson_: See seventh grade.

The material, distribution of time to subject matter, heading and
samples may profitably be the same as for the three preceding grades.


JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL

When the seventh, eighth, and ninth grades are set off by themselves
and take the name of Junior High School, conditions are somewhat
different than when they remain a part of the grade system.

The ideals of the schools differ, as they should, in some respects. A
most striking difference is that a greater freedom in the choice of
subjects is made possible in the junior high school.

The tool subjects are wisely still obligatory and penmanship should be
pursued until mastered sufficiently well to be a resource and not a
liability in carrying on other subjects.

_Aim_: To perfect penmanship as a tool for school work and to impress
those who plan to enter upon business careers at the end of the ninth
year with the fact that they should be especially serious in penmanship
preparation.

_Material_: Similar to that suggested for preceding grades.

_Required subject_: Penmanship should be required through the seventh
grade and of all eighth grade pupils who cannot meet a reasonably
high standard previously agreed upon by the principal, supervisor, and
teachers.

_Administration of tests_: These should be given several weeks before
the end of each semester in order to permit pupils who have not reached
the standard set to include penmanship in their programs.

Ninth grade pupils who are specializing in commercial subjects should
have an opportunity for daily drill in penmanship in order to perfect
their work to a higher degree. The materials, distribution of time
to subject matter, form for headings, and samples may profitably be
similar to that suggested for former grades.

The junior high teacher does not have the same opportunity that the
grade teacher enjoys for the observation of results unless it is so
arranged that the penmanship teacher handles spelling also. In such
a case by using tact, firmness and some invention this period of
application may prove almost or quite as valuable to the acquisition of
the correct writing habit as the time devoted to the learning of the
drills.


SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL

Theoretically, students in the senior high school should not find
it necessary to pursue penmanship for acquisition as a tool, but
practically, we find many who are so unskilled in this subject that it
is necessary to make provision for them.

In any senior high school we may have pupils who have not had the
advantages of a good foundation in the grades or in junior high. Again,
there are those who acquire manual dexterity with great difficulty.
Lastly, we have great numbers that are qualifying for commercial lines.
The needs of all must be met. (Discussed more fully in Chapter One.)

_Aim_: To provide every student who leaves the senior high school with
a good working tool for business or college. No possible excuse should
be offered in place of a good handwriting by a senior high school
graduate who has had the opportunity to qualify.

_Materials_: Similar to those in the junior high school.

_Required subject_: Penmanship should be required of all who cannot
meet a reasonably high standard agreed upon by principal, supervisor,
and teachers. Commercial students should qualify to a much higher
degree than others.

The administrations of tests, distribution of time to subject matter,
samples, may well be carried on in a manner similar to that suggested
for the upper grades and junior high school.




CHAPTER EIGHT SUPERVISION AND THE PENMANSHIP SUPERVISOR


SUPERVISION IN THE PAST

Supervision had its rise in the early 70’s we are told. At that time
educators began to follow to some extent the example of the world
of industry. Lotus D. Coffman gives us as a humorous definition of
the function of the early supervisor the following: “The business
of a supervisor is to cast a genial influence over the schools, but
otherwise he is not to interfere with the work of the schools.”

Supervision is evolving, and the definition of today may need to be
revised tomorrow. At present a supervisor represents the superintendent
in certain well defined lines. As a principal he may have charge of a
building. He may have charge of two or more subjects in a smaller city.
He may have charge of one subject in a city, county, or state.


FUNCTION OF THE SUPERVISOR

The first function of a supervisor is generally acknowledged to
be improvement in classroom teaching. Let us place second the
responsibility for a suitable course of study (in penmanship the
selection of the text), and third, responsibility for standard methods
whereby results may be measured.


LEADERSHIP A PRIME QUALIFICATION

Broad constructive leadership is the prime requisite for one who would
take upon himself the arduous duties of supervisor, be it of one
subject or of many. Each candidate should subject himself to a rigorous
self-rating process before taking up supervision, and those in service
should continue _to look within_. Many a situation would be saved to
leadership and society if all who term themselves supervisors or even
expect to some day become such would turn the white light of inspection
upon themselves. It is not going too far to say that the prospective
supervisor before launching himself should take unstinting pains to
diagnose his ability as a leader.


PERSONALITY A NECESSARY QUALIFICATION

Supervisory positions are like others in that two main qualities are
essential, namely, desirable personality and sufficient preparation.
These essentials must be fairly well balanced in the person who is a
candidate for a supervisory office. We are familiar with the type of
supervisor who, though largely lacking scholastic attainments, is so
pleasing as to give a certain desirable kind of service and who is
therefore retained year after year. Compare such a supervisor with the
reverse, the one who has all the professional degrees obtainable but
who lacks the human touch. Neither type is entirely qualified.

Teachers are good judges. Consult almost any teacher-made list for
desirable qualities, and you will find that the points that make up a
desirable personality are given preference to scholarship and other
phases of preparation.

Genuine leaders are always on the alert to improve themselves.
When leaders are kind, constantly courteous, permit initiative,
keep informed on current movements, exhibit tact, show industry,
self-control, are optimistic, reliable, courageous, just, open-minded,
progressive, sincere, tolerant; then, and then only, shall we cease to
hear teachers speak of the worthlessness of supervision. (Perhaps poor
supervision has been a large factor in fostering poor teaching.)

Physical strength to meet the numerous demands is an essential.
Desirable, in fact, necessary requisites are pleasing manners, such
as poise, refinement, good speaking voice, and self possession. The
exercise of good taste in the matter of correct and tasteful clothing
goes far toward obtaining and holding the respect of those with whom a
supervisor comes in contact. Dress should be simple and appropriate, of
excellent quality, and not too striking. It has been the observation
of the writer that supervisors, both men and women frequently use such
excruciatingly bad taste in the matter of apparel that those who come
in contact with them are very unfavorably impressed. It does not take a
great deal of imagination to realize why the “celluloid collar man” and
the “overdressed” or “home made” woman is not a welcome adjunct in the
classroom or at neighborhood gatherings.


BROAD PREPARATION INDISPENSABLE TO THE SUPERVISOR

In the not distant past special-subject supervisors found it possible
to qualify with no further general preparation than a high school
diploma and a summer session or two at some higher institution. This
is now legally impossible in many states and wisely so. A general
college course is desirable, and particularly so since supervisors are
apt to have occasion to direct teachers who have had such training.
Supervisors are criticized, often justly, for being narrow and knowing
only one subject. Older supervisors should avail themselves of the many
opportunities for professional growth.

In addition to being a graduate of high school and college a supervisor
of a special subject should have special training and practice teaching
along the line that he is supervising. Graduate work on the part of the
general supervisor as the years go by is becoming almost a necessity.

Travel is an essential part of education. It is not putting it too
strongly to say that all supervisors should spend a part of nearly
every summer in travel or at some university. Exception may be made of
those who are called upon to contribute to some higher institution as
instructors.

Every year worthy new educational books come from the press, and many
worth-while articles are published in educational journals. Supervisors
who have a real message should be willing to contribute to these
journals. By working out such articles the authors clarify their own
ideas and inspire their fellow workers. Careful reading of educational
journals is bound to keep special-subject supervisors aware of the
general trend of education. Technical journals should each month find
their way to the desk of the supervisor of special subjects.

It is assumed that no person would be unwise enough to attempt any sort
of supervision before having served a probationary term in the grades
and if possible in high school. This gives the proper background for
effective supervision. The best supervisors are always in a process of
preparation and each year adds its quota of experience, rounding off
here, burnishing up there, softening a high light of deficiency and
blending all into a more helpful and desirable whole.


CONTINUAL PREPARATION ESSENTIAL

Let us assume that a person with such a personality and scholarship as
was mentioned earlier in this chapter is now launched in a supervisory
position. That person does not cease his preparation but rather
continues it along practical lines which may include some or all of the
features that are mentioned below.

The supervisor who has a sound knowledge of educational method will be
able to improve class room teaching and this is the primary purpose of
supervision.

The course of study is a feature that any supervisor should be
constantly preparing to deal with, but mainly in connection with
suggestions from the teachers who are dealing first hand with the
children. It is the part of wisdom and justice to capitalize the
strength of the teaching force, always giving due credit therefor.

The supervisor knows how to administer standard tests, and is prepared
to stand by the findings. He is willing to point out the need of
special educational treatment in specific cases. He must be prepared
to place especially talented children in their place and without fear.
Each child should have _his_ opportunity, according to Dr. Virgil
Dickson. This is real democracy.

The penmanship supervisor should at any time be able to demonstrate
his subject with the aid of the class for the benefit of the teacher.
One thing is an essential, however: The supervisor must do this in
an artistic manner, and vastly better than the teacher can do it.
Demonstration lessons are no doubt the most popular help that can be
rendered to teachers. Teachers like to see how some one else meets
the classroom problem, and it is a golden time for the supervisor to
inculcate sound educational principles and good practice.

The supervisor should be prepared to administer details such as routine
matters, to plan visiting days that are really worth while, to select
texts, material, etc.

Supervisors should not only be constantly preparing themselves for
greater usefulness but should stand ready through courses provided
by themselves to offer encouragement in extension work, worth-while
meetings, and in the planning of educational exhibits. Such exhibits
should be kept by the supervisors in order to show new teachers what
has been attained in former years. Standards can easily be made clear
in this fashion.


RATING

The much discussed problem of rating of teachers, first used in 1896 in
Milwaukee, is the cause of considerable “grief” among many. We are all
rated in one way or another, and after all why be sensitive about it? A
good cure is a self rating card, filled in carefully, prayerfully, and
then laid aside until next self rating day arrives. Self competition
is bound to yield good results. Let us learn to look in the mirror
without flinching.

Whatever system is used the teacher should have a copy of the score
card and thereby learn upon what qualities to place values. The
score card is especially valuable for the reason just given. No
teacher should rise or fall on the strength of one rating, or on the
strength of the rating of one person. Boice, Elliott and Rugg have all
contributed much in the way of score cards. Mr. Cook of South Dakota
explains a most interesting and meritorious system in use in his state.

It remains for Katherine Taylor Cranor to present the first self
scoring card for the supervisor as an aid to efficiency in school work.
It offers to each one upon whom the mantle of supervision has fallen
food for thought. It must provoke any thinking person to a critical
evaluation of himself and his work. The six main topics covered are in
substance as follows:

1. Educational, social, and personal qualifications: These include
liberal education, tact, tolerance, poise, appearance, disposition,
leadership, loyalty, ability to speak in public, patience, 260 points.

2. Course of study: Cooperation in making it, ability to interpret it,
140 points.

3. Relationship to teachers: Wise selection, consideration of health of
teachers, growth, self improvement, initiative, effect on their lives,
community needs, 200 points.

4. Duty toward instruction: Visiting classes, 300 points.

5. Attention to details: Text books, demonstrations, routine, 50 points.

6. Publicity, 50 points.

  _Total_, 1,000 points.


THE BEST QUALIFIED SUPERVISOR

Is it too much to say that the best qualified, the best prepared
penmanship supervisor is the one that shares responsibility, is broad
visioned, has both hand and heart culture, is helpful, courageous,
and who still retains the human touch and most rapidly makes himself
unnecessary to the teacher?




BIBLIOGRAPHY


_American Penman_ (Austin Norman Palmer, Editor), a monthly
publication. A. N. Palmer Publishing Co., New York City.

Ayres, Dr. Leonard P., _A Scale for Measuring the Handwriting of
Adults_. Division of Education, Russell Sage Foundation. New York City,
1915.

_Business Educator_, a monthly publication, Columbus, O.

_Course of Study Monographs_, Elementary Schools, No. 5, Penmanship.
Berkeley, California, 1921.

_Course of Study, Syllabus in Penmanship_, as adopted by the Board of
Education, City of New York, Park Avenue and 59th Street, New York,
1921.

_Course of Study, Handwriting_, by Administrative Department, Colorado
Springs Public Schools, Colorado Springs, Colorado, 1921.

Daugherty, Mary L., “History of the Teaching of Handwriting in
America,” _Elementary School Journal_, December, 1917.

Edson, Andrew W., Associate City Superintendent, New York, _Muscular
Movement in Its Practical Application_. A. N. Palmer Publishing Co.,
New York, 1910.

Freeman and Daugherty, _How to Teach Handwriting_. Houghton, Mifflin
Co., Boston, 1923.

Freeman, Frank Nugent, _The Teaching of Handwriting_. Houghton, Mifflin
Co., Boston, 1914.

---- “Present Day Issues in the Teaching of Handwriting,” _Elementary
School Journal_, Sept., 1923.

French, W. L., _Psychology of Handwriting_. Putnam, New York, 1914.

Gray, Clarence Freeman, _A Score Card for the Measurement of
Handwriting_. The University, Austin, Tex., 1915.

Hiles, Leta Severance, and Lorenz, Marian S., _Course of Study_, Long
Beach Public Schools, Long Beach, California, 1923.

Lister, C. C., _Muscular Movement Writing, Advanced Book_. The
Macmillan Company, New York, 1919.

---- _What I Saw in a Writing Class_. A. N. Palmer Publishing Co., New
York, 1912.

---- _Writing Lessons in the Primary Grades and Teachers’ Guide to
Writing Lessons in Primary Grades_. A. N. Palmer Publishing Co., New
York, 1912.

Meleney, Dr. Clarence E., Associate City Superintendent, New York City,
_Observation on the Teaching of Penmanship in the Elementary Schools_.
A. N. Palmer Publishing Co., New York, 1911.

Mills, Edward Clarence, _Business Penmanship_. American Book Co., New
York, 1916.

Palmer, Austin Norman, _Palmer Method_. A. N. Palmer Publishing Co.,
New York, 1921.

---- _Penmanship Pointers_, a bi-monthly magazine. A. N. Palmer
Publishing Co., New York.

---- _Palmer Penmanship Budget._ A. N. Palmer Publishing Co., New York,
1915.

Shouse, J. B., “Obstacles to Good Handwriting,” _Elementary School
Journal_, December, 1923.

Smith, Albert J., _Applied Graphology_. The Gregg Publishing Co., New
York, 1920.

Snesrud, J. M., _Handwriting Efficiency in Junior and Senior High
Schools_. The Gregg Publishing Co., New York, 1921.

_Spencerian Authors._ Ivison, Blakeman, Taylor & Co., New York, 1874.

Starch, Dr. Daniel, _Educational Measurements_. The Macmillan Company,
New York, 1916.

---- _Educational Psychology_. The Macmillan Company, New York, 1919.

Stryker, J. A., “Normal School Penmanship.” Paper read before the
National Association of Penmanship Supervisors, Chicago, 1914.

_The 18th Year Book of the National Society for the Study of
Education_, Part II. Public School Publishing Co., Bloomington, Ill.,
1919.

Thompson, Mary Elizabeth, _Psychology and Pedagogy of Writing_. Warwick
& York, Baltimore, 1911.

Thompson, O. S., _Thompson’s New Penmanship, Teachers’ Manual_.
Privately printed, Monrovia, California, 1915.

Taylor, Dr. Joseph S., District Superintendent, New York City,
_Educational Value of Muscular Movement Writing_. A. N. Palmer
Publishing Co., New York, 1910.

Zaner, C. P., _Zaner Method Manual 144_. Zaner & Bloser Publishing Co.,
Columbus, Ohio, 1915.

---- _Blackboard Writing._ Zaner & Bloser Publishing Co., Columbus,
Ohio, 1911.




INDEX


  Accuracy, Penmanship an aid to, 32

  Alphabet, 76

  Association, Laws of, 41

  Athletics, Penmanship as correlated with, 15;
    Dr. Gulick’s rules, 32;
    relation to penmanship, 33

  Awards, 83


  Blackboard, Kind and use of, 63;
    as a teacher, 64;
    gives courage to poor writers, 65;
    points to be observed in lessons on, 65, 67

  Blackboard procedure for all grades, 73, 75

  Blotter, Use of, 70

  Boice, quoted, 121


  Chamberlain, Quotation, 32

  Clews, Henry, Statement of, 9

  Coffman, Lotus D., quoted, 113

  Colonel Parker, Quotation, 57

  Commercial schools, Success of, 45

  Commercialization of penmanship, 9

  Comprehensive Physical Culture, Rules for good bearing quoted from, 22

  Conventions, Obedience to, encouraged, 13

  Cook, quoted, 121

  Cooperation of all officials and departments necessary, 58, 59

  Correlation of penmanship with other subjects, 57

  Counting, 83

  Count, correct, Movement regulated by, 24

  Cranor, Katherine Taylor, quoted, 121

  Credit evaluation, 50


  Dictation, 83


  Elliott, quoted, 121

  Eyesight, Conservation of, 47


  Figures, 75

  Folders, 68


  Good writing, worth while, 11

  Good writing a time saver, 12

  Good writing, Confidence established through, 13

  Grade, First, 86;
    nature and difficulty of problem, 87, 88;
    aim, 88;
    material, 89;
    length of lesson, 89;
    demonstration, 89;
    distribution of time, 90;
    names, 90;
    Z group, 90

  Grade, Second, 91;
    conditions necessary for laying correct foundation, 91;
    results based upon use of correct habit, 92;
    board work, 92;
    posture, 92;
    aim, 93;
    material, 93;
    length of lesson, 94;
    demonstration 94;
    Z group, 94;
    distribution of time to subject matter, 94;
    headings, 94

  Grade, Third, 95;
    ability of, 95;
    Dr. Ayres, quoted, on legibility, 95;
    reviews, 96;
    aim, 96;
    material, 97;
    length of lesson, 97;
    distribution of time, 97;
    heading, 97;
    sample, 97, 98

  Grade, Fourth, 98;
    demand met by, 98;
    aim, 98;
    materials, 99;
    length of lesson, 97;
    distribution of time, 99;
    heading, 99;
    sample, 100

  Grade, Fifth, 100;
    independent work may be expected of, 100;
    aim, 101;
    material, 101;
    length of lesson, 101;
    distribution of time to subject matter, 102;
    heading, 102;
    sample, 102

  Grade, Sixth, 103;
    demand pressing in, 103;
    object clear to pupils, 103;
    aim, 103

  Grade, Seventh, 104;
    quality equal to that of adults, 104;
    interest continued, 104;
    home practice of, 104, 105;
    musical accompaniment, 105;
    captains in, 105, 106;
    results, 106;
    aim, 106;
    length of lesson, 106

  Grade, Eighth, 107;
    Practice maintained in, 107;
    practical aid of pupils in, 107;
    individuality develops in, 108;
    habits important in, 108;
    aim, 108;
    length of lesson, 108

  Group Plan most effective, 38

  Group Plan, Value of, 25;
    the working of, 26, 27, 28


  Habits, Correct maxims for, 39, 40;
    new habit may discommode, 40

  Habits, Correct, established by repetition, 41

  Habits, good, Objectives in, 77

  High School, Junior, 109;
    Condition in, 109;
    ideals of, 109;
    tool subjects in, 109;
    aim, 109;
    material, 109;
    required subjects, 109;
    tests, 110;
    application, 110

  High School, Senior, 111;
    many unskilled in, 111;
    lack of preparation, 111;
    aim, 111;
    materials, 111;
    required subject, 111;
    tests, 112


  Initial drafts, 11

  Ink, Kind, care of, 71


  James, on relaxation, quoted, 16

  James, Quotation on interest, 33


  Line Quality, 79


  McMurray, How to Study, 11

  McMurray, quoted, 62

  Manual arts, Penmanship as one, 13

  Mastery, Pleasure and profit in, 42

  Material, Economy of, 71;
    good, necessary, 47

  Maxwell, Henry, Study of efficiency by, 50

  Muscular movement a reformer, 14

  Muscular movement, application to general writing, 42

  Muscular movement conserves time and energy, 45, 46;
    conserves vision, 47;
    conserves health generally, 48

  Muscular movement defined, 43

  Muscular movement, universal method, 44

  Muscular movement, Utility of, 12


  Name-Cards, 75


  Paper, Economy of, 67;
    quality and ruling, 68

  Paper, How to move and slant, 73

  Parents, Influence of, 60

  Pencils, Kind, 68;
    Use of, by primary pupils only, 69

  Penholder, kind, 70

  Penholders, position of, 21, 22

  Pens, Kind, care of, 69

  Plan, A general, 85

  Poor writing a handicap, 10

  Position, Correct, of hand, 20-21

  Posture, correct, Value of, 19;
    methods of obtaining, 19-20

  Posture, correct, Frequency of drill on, 20

  Practice, Results of thoughtless, 33;
    frequency means economy, 34;
    concrete suggestions for preliminary, 34;
    content and length of period, 35, 36;
    effective leads to correct writing habit, 37

  Progress lesson, 77, 78


  Rating, Value of, 120, 121

  Relaxation a necessary condition, 16

  Relaxation of adults, 16

  Relaxation, Six methods of obtaining, 17-18

  Review, Value of, 30


  Samples, Object of, 80;
    procedure and standards, 81

  Score card, Value of, 121

  Segregation, Value of, 78, 79

  Similarity of letter forms, recognition of, 30

  Slant, Correct, the result of correct direction of movement, 23

  Standards, Two sets of, 9

  Study, How to, 72;
    capitals, 72;
    words and sentences, 72

  Supervisor, defined, The best, 122

  Supervisor, Function of, 114

  Supervisor, Leadership a prime qualification, 114;
    preparation and desirable personality necessary, 115, 116, 117;
    physical endurance and appearance, 116;
    experience an aid to, 118;
    continual preparation necessary for, 118;
    aid in improving class room instruction, 119;
    course of study and the, 119;
    value of tests recognized by, 119;
    ability to demonstrate necessary for, 119;
    attention to routine matters, 120;
    service, 120

  Supervisor’s visit, Preparation of teacher for, 81, 82


  Teacher, Duty of, 52;
    qualifications of, 53;
    as psychologists, 54;
    as demonstrators, 55;
    best proof of a good, 55;
    personal influence of, 56;
    as an inspiration, 56

  Technique necessary, 51

  Test, A satisfactory, 61, 62

  Tests, Application of standard, 76;
    endurance, 76

  Tests, standard, Use of, 84

  Theorist, defined, A, 52

  Time, Economy of, 48, 49;
    a computation on, 50

  Timepiece, Use of, 83

  Typewriter, Use of, 9


  Visualization, Correct, 28;
    principle of multiple impression, 29

  Visualization, Rules for effective, 31


  Z Group, 77

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber’s Notes:

Illustrations have been moved to paragraph breaks near where they are
mentioned.

Punctuation has been made consistent.

Variations in spelling and hyphenation were retained as they appear in
the original publication, except that obvious typographical errors have
been corrected.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PENMANSHIP ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
