The Project Gutenberg eBook of Historical Record of the Seventieth, or, The
Surrey Regiment of Foot :  containing an account of the formation of the
regiment in 1758, and of its  subsequent services to 1848, by Richard
Cannon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Historical Record of the Seventieth, or, The Surrey Regiment of
       Foot :  containing an account of the formation of the regiment in
       1758, and of its  subsequent services to 1848

Author: Richard Cannon

Release Date: November 12, 2021 [eBook #66719]

Language: English


Produced by: Brian Coe, John Campbell and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
             produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital
             Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORICAL RECORD OF THE
SEVENTIETH, OR, THE SURREY REGIMENT OF FOOT :  CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF THE
FORMATION OF THE REGIMENT IN 1758, AND OF ITS  SUBSEQUENT SERVICES TO
1848 ***




  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Footnote anchors are denoted by [number], and the footnotes have been
  placed at the end of the ‘Introduction’ section.

  Some minor changes to the text are noted at the end of the book.




  HISTORICAL RECORD

  OF

  THE SEVENTIETH,

  OR

  THE SURREY REGIMENT OF FOOT.

  CONTAINING

  AN ACCOUNT OF THE FORMATION OF THE REGIMENT
  IN 1758,

  AND OF ITS SUBSEQUENT SERVICES
  TO 1848.


  COMPILED BY

  RICHARD CANNON, ESQ.,
  ADJUTANT-GENERAL’S OFFICE, HORSE GUARDS.

  LONDON:
  PARKER, FURNIVALL, & PARKER,
  30, CHARING-CROSS.

  MDCCCXLIX.




  LONDON: PRINTED BY W. CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET,
  FOR HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE.




GENERAL ORDERS.


  _HORSE-GUARDS_,
  _1st January, 1836_.

His Majesty has been pleased to command that, with the view of
doing the fullest justice to Regiments, as well as to Individuals
who have distinguished themselves by their Bravery in Action with
the Enemy, an Account of the Services of every Regiment in the
British Army shall be published under the superintendence and
direction of the Adjutant-General; and that this Account shall
contain the following particulars, viz.:--

  ---- The Period and Circumstances of the Original Formation of
  the Regiment; The Stations at which it has been from time to time
  employed; The Battles, Sieges, and other Military Operations
  in which it has been engaged, particularly specifying any
  Achievement it may have performed, and the Colours, Trophies,
  &c., it may have captured from the Enemy.

  ---- The Names of the Officers, and the number of
  Non-Commissioned Officers and Privates Killed or Wounded by the
  Enemy, specifying the place and Date of the Action.

  ---- The Names of those Officers who, in consideration of their
  Gallant Services and Meritorious Conduct in Engagements with the
  Enemy, have been distinguished with Titles, Medals, or other
  Marks of His Majesty’s gracious favour.

  ---- The Names of all such Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers,
  and Privates, as may have specially signalized themselves in
  Action.

  And,

  ---- The Badges and Devices which the Regiment may have been
  permitted to bear, and the Causes on account of which such Badges
  or Devices, or any other Marks of Distinction, have been granted.

  By Command of the Right Honorable

  GENERAL LORD HILL,
  _Commanding-in-Chief_.

  JOHN MACDONALD,
  _Adjutant-General_.




PREFACE.


The character and credit of the British Army must chiefly depend
upon the zeal and ardour by which all who enter into its service
are animated, and consequently it is of the highest importance that
any measure calculated to excite the spirit of emulation, by which
alone great and gallant actions are achieved, should be adopted.

Nothing can more fully tend to the accomplishment of this desirable
object than a full display of the noble deeds with which the
Military History of our country abounds. To hold forth these bright
examples to the imitation of the youthful soldier, and thus to
incite him to emulate the meritorious conduct of those who have
preceded him in their honorable career, are among the motives that
have given rise to the present publication.

The operations of the British Troops are, indeed, announced in the
“London Gazette,” from whence they are transferred into the public
prints: the achievements of our armies are thus made known at the
time of their occurrence, and receive the tribute of praise and
admiration to which they are entitled. On extraordinary occasions,
the Houses of Parliament have been in the habit of conferring on
the Commanders, and the Officers and Troops acting under their
orders, expressions of approbation and of thanks for their skill
and bravery; and these testimonials, confirmed by the high honour
of their Sovereign’s approbation, constitute the reward which the
soldier most highly prizes.

It has not, however, until late years, been the practice (which
appears to have long prevailed in some of the Continental armies)
for British Regiments to keep regular records of their services
and achievements. Hence some difficulty has been experienced in
obtaining, particularly from the old Regiments, an authentic
account of their origin and subsequent services.

This defect will now be remedied, in consequence of His Majesty
having been pleased to command that every Regiment shall, in
future, keep a full and ample record of its services at home and
abroad.

From the materials thus collected, the country will henceforth
derive information as to the difficulties and privations which
chequer the career of those who embrace the military profession. In
Great Britain, where so large a number of persons are devoted to
the active concerns of agriculture, manufactures, and commerce, and
where these pursuits have, for so long a period, being undisturbed
by the _presence of war_, which few other countries have escaped,
comparatively little is known of the vicissitudes of active service
and of the casualties of climate, to which, even during peace, the
British Troops are exposed in every part of the globe, with little
or no interval of repose.

In their tranquil enjoyment of the blessings which the country
derives from the industry and the enterprise of the agriculturist
and the trader, its happy inhabitants may be supposed not often to
reflect on the perilous duties of the soldier and the sailor,--on
their sufferings,--and on the sacrifice of valuable life, by which
so many national benefits are obtained and preserved.

The conduct of the British Troops, their valour, and endurance,
have shone conspicuously under great and trying difficulties; and
their character has been established in Continental warfare by the
irresistible spirit with which they have effected debarkations in
spite of the most formidable opposition, and by the gallantry and
steadiness with which they have maintained their advantages against
superior numbers.

In the official Reports made by the respective Commanders, ample
justice has generally been done to the gallant exertions of the
Corps employed; but the details of their services and of acts of
individual bravery can only be fully given in the Annals of the
various Regiments.

These Records are now preparing for publication, under his
Majesty’s special authority, by Mr. RICHARD CANNON, Principal Clerk
of the Adjutant General’s Office; and while the perusal of them
cannot fail to be useful and interesting to military men of every
rank, it is considered that they will also afford entertainment and
information to the general reader, particularly to those who may
have served in the Army, or who have relatives in the Service.

There exists in the breasts of most of those who have served, or
are serving, in the Army, an _Esprit de Corps_--an attachment
to everything belonging to their Regiment; to such persons a
narrative of the services of their own Corps cannot fail to prove
interesting. Authentic accounts of the actions of the great, the
valiant, the loyal, have always been of paramount interest with
a brave and civilized people. Great Britain has produced a race
of heroes who, in moments of danger and terror, have stood “firm
as the rocks of their native shore:” and when half the world has
been arrayed against them, they have fought the battles of their
Country with unshaken fortitude. It is presumed that a record of
achievements in war,--victories so complete and surprising, gained
by our countrymen, our brothers, our fellow citizens in arms,--a
record which revives the memory of the brave, and brings their
gallant deeds before us,--will certainly prove acceptable to the
public.

Biographical Memoirs of the Colonels and other distinguished
Officers will be introduced in the Records of their respective
Regiments, and the Honorary Distinctions which have, from time to
time, been conferred upon each Regiment, as testifying the value
and importance of its services, will be faithfully set forth.

As a convenient mode of Publication, the Record of each Regiment
will be printed in a distinct number, so that when the whole shall
be completed, the Parts may be bound up in numerical succession.




INTRODUCTION

TO

THE INFANTRY.


The natives of Britain have, at all periods, been celebrated for
innate courage and unshaken firmness, and the national superiority
of the British troops over those of other countries has been
evinced in the midst of the most imminent perils. History contains
so many proofs of extraordinary acts of bravery, that no doubts can
be raised upon the facts which are recorded. It must therefore be
admitted, that the distinguishing feature of the British soldier is
INTREPIDITY. This quality was evinced by the inhabitants of England
when their country was invaded by Julius Cæsar with a Roman army,
on which occasion the undaunted Britons rushed into the sea to
attack the Roman soldiers as they descended from their ships; and,
although their discipline and arms were inferior to those of their
adversaries, yet their fierce and dauntless bearing intimidated
the flower of the Roman troops, including Cæsar’s favourite tenth
legion. Their arms consisted of spears, short swords, and other
weapons of rude construction. They had chariots, to the axles of
which were fastened sharp pieces of iron resembling scythe-blades,
and infantry in long chariots resembling waggons, who alighted
and fought on foot, and for change of ground, pursuit or retreat,
sprang into the chariot and drove off with the speed of cavalry.
These inventions were, however, unavailing against Cæsar’s
legions: in the course of time a military system, with discipline
and subordination, was introduced, and British courage, being
thus regulated, was exerted to the greatest advantage; a full
development of the national character followed, and it shone forth
in all its native brilliancy.

The military force of the Anglo-Saxons consisted principally of
infantry: Thanes, and other men of property, however, fought on
horseback. The infantry were of two classes, heavy and light. The
former carried large shields armed with spikes, long broad swords
and spears; and the latter were armed with swords or spears only.
They had also men armed with clubs, others with battle-axes and
javelins.

The feudal troops established by William the Conqueror consisted
(as already stated in the Introduction to the Cavalry) almost
entirely of horse; but when the warlike barons and knights, with
their trains of tenants and vassals, took the field, a proportion
of men appeared on foot, and, although these were of inferior
degree, they proved stout-hearted Britons of stanch fidelity. When
stipendiary troops were employed, infantry always constituted a
considerable portion of the military force; and this _arme_ has
since acquired, in every quarter of the globe, a celebrity never
exceeded by the armies of any nation at any period.

The weapons carried by the infantry, during the several reigns
succeeding the Conquest, were bows and arrows, half-pikes, lances,
halberds, various kinds of battle-axes, swords, and daggers. Armour
was worn on the head and body, and in course of time the practice
became general for military men to be so completely cased in steel,
that it was almost impossible to slay them.

The introduction of the use of gunpowder in the destructive
purposes of war, in the early part of the fourteenth
century, produced a change in the arms and equipment of the
infantry-soldier. Bows and arrows gave place to various kinds of
fire-arms, but British archers continued formidable adversaries;
and, owing to the inconvenient construction and imperfect bore of
the fire-arms when first introduced, a body of men, well trained
in the use of the bow from their youth, was considered a valuable
acquisition to every army, even as late as the sixteenth century.

During a great part of the reign of Queen Elizabeth each company
of infantry usually consisted of men armed five different ways; in
every hundred men forty were “_men-at-arms_,” and sixty “_shot_;”
the “men-at-arms” were ten halberdiers, or battle-axe men, and
thirty pikemen; and the “shot” were twenty archers, twenty
musketeers, and twenty harquebusiers, and each man carried, besides
his principal weapon, a sword and dagger.

Companies of infantry varied at this period in numbers from 150
to 300 men; each company had a colour or ensign, and the mode of
formation recommended by an English military writer (Sir John
Smithe) in 1590 was:--the colour in the centre of the company
guarded by the halberdiers; the pikemen in equal proportions, on
each flank of the halberdiers: half the musketeers on each flank
of the pikes; half the archers on each flank of the musketeers,
and the harquebusiers (whose arms were much lighter than the
muskets then in use) in equal proportions on each flank of the
company for skirmishing.[1] It was customary to unite a number
of companies into one body, called a REGIMENT, which frequently
amounted to three thousand men: but each company continued to carry
a colour. Numerous improvements were eventually introduced in the
construction of fire-arms, and, it having been found impossible to
make armour proof against the muskets then in use (which carried
a very heavy ball) without its being too weighty for the soldier,
armour was gradually laid aside by the infantry in the seventeenth
century: bows and arrows also fell into disuse, and the infantry
were reduced to two classes, viz.: _musketeers_, armed with
matchlock muskets, swords, and daggers; and _pikemen_, armed with
pikes from fourteen to eighteen feet long, and swords.

In the early part of the seventeenth century Gustavus Adolphus,
King of Sweden, reduced the strength of regiments to 1000 men. He
caused the gunpowder, which had heretofore been carried in flasks,
or in small wooden bandoliers, each containing a charge, to be
made up into cartridges, and carried in pouches; and he formed
each regiment into two wings of musketeers, and a centre division
of pikemen. He also adopted the practice of forming four regiments
into a brigade; and the number of colours was afterwards reduced to
three in each regiment. He formed his columns so compactly that his
infantry could resist the charge of the celebrated Polish horsemen
and Austrian cuirassiers; and his armies became the admiration of
other nations. His mode of formation was copied by the English,
French, and other European states; but so great was the prejudice
in favour of ancient customs, that all his improvements were not
adopted until near a century afterwards.

In 1664 King Charles II. raised a corps for sea-service, styled
the Admiral’s regiment. In 1678 each company of 100 men usually
consisted of 30 pikemen, 60 musketeers, and 10 men armed with light
firelocks. In this year the King added a company of men armed with
hand grenades to each of the old British regiments, which was
designated the “grenadier company.” Daggers were so contrived as to
fit in the muzzles of the muskets, and bayonets similar to those
at present in use were adopted about twenty years afterwards.

An Ordnance regiment was raised in 1685, by order of King James
II., to guard the artillery, and was designated the Royal Fusiliers
(now 7th Foot). This corps, and the companies of grenadiers, did
not carry pikes.

King William III. incorporated the Admiral’s regiment in the second
Foot Guards, and raised two Marine regiments for sea-service.
During the war in this reign, each company of infantry (excepting
the fusiliers and grenadiers) consisted of 14 pikemen and 46
musketeers; the captains carried pikes; lieutenants, partisans;
ensigns, half-pikes; and serjeants, halberds. After the peace in
1697 the Marine regiments were disbanded, but were again formed on
the breaking out of the war in 1702.[2]

During the reign of Queen Anne the pikes were laid aside, and every
infantry soldier was armed with a musket, bayonet, and sword; the
grenadiers ceased, about the same period, to carry hand grenades;
and the regiments were directed to lay aside their third colour:
the corps of Royal Artillery was first added to the Army in this
reign.

About the year 1745, the men of the battalion companies of infantry
ceased to carry swords; during the reign of George II. light
companies were added to infantry regiments; and in 1764 a Board of
General Officers recommended that the grenadiers should lay aside
their swords, as that weapon had never been used during the Seven
Years’ War. Since that period the arms of the infantry soldier have
been limited to the musket and bayonet.

The arms and equipment of the British Troops have seldom differed
materially, since the Conquest, from those of other European
states; and in some respects the arming has, at certain periods,
been allowed to be inferior to that of the nations with whom they
have had to contend; yet, under this disadvantage, the bravery and
superiority of the British infantry have been evinced on very many
and most trying occasions, and splendid victories have been gained
over very superior numbers.

Great Britain has produced a race of lion-like champions who have
dared to confront a host of foes, and have proved themselves
valiant with any arms. At _Crecy_, King Edward III., at the head
of about 30,000 men, defeated, on the 26th of August, 1346, Philip
King of France, whose army is said to have amounted to 100,000
men; here British valour encountered veterans of renown:--the
King of Bohemia, the King of Majorca, and many princes and nobles
were slain, and the French army was routed and cut to pieces. Ten
years afterwards, Edward Prince of Wales, who was designated the
Black Prince, defeated, at _Poictiers_, with 14,000 men, a French
army of 60,000 horse, besides infantry, and took John I., King of
France, and his son Philip, prisoners. On the 25th of October,
1415, King Henry V., with an army of about 13,000 men, although
greatly exhausted by marches, privations, and sickness, defeated,
at _Agincourt_, the Constable of France, at the head of the flower
of the French nobility and an army said to amount to 60,000 men,
and gained a complete victory.

During the seventy years’ war between the United Provinces of the
Netherlands and the Spanish monarchy, which commenced in 1578 and
terminated in 1648, the British infantry in the service of the
States-General were celebrated for their unconquerable spirit and
firmness;[3] and in the thirty years’ war between the Protestant
Princes and the Emperor of Germany, the British Troops in the
service of Sweden and other states were celebrated for deeds of
heroism.[4] In the wars of Queen Anne, the fame of the British
army under the great MARLBOROUGH was spread throughout the world;
and if we glance at the achievements performed within the memory
of persons now living, there is abundant proof that the Britons
of the present age are not inferior to their ancestors in the
qualities which constitute good soldiers. Witness the deeds of
the brave men, of whom there are many now surviving, who fought in
Egypt in 1801, under the brave Abercromby, and compelled the French
army, which had been vainly styled _Invincible_, to evacuate that
country; also the services of the gallant Troops during the arduous
campaigns in the Peninsula, under the immortal WELLINGTON; and
the determined stand made by the British Army at Waterloo, where
Napoleon Bonaparte, who had long been the inveterate enemy of Great
Britain, and had sought and planned her destruction by every means
he could devise, was compelled to leave his vanquished legions to
their fate, and to place himself at the disposal of the British
Government. These achievements, with others of recent dates in the
distant climes of India, prove that the same valour and constancy
which glowed in the breasts of the heroes of Crecy, Poictiers,
Agincourt, Blenheim, and Ramilies, continue to animate the Britons
of the nineteenth century.

The British Soldier is distinguished for a robust and muscular
frame,--intrepidity which no danger can appal,--unconquerable
spirit and resolution,--patience in fatigue and privation, and
cheerful obedience to his superiors. These qualities, united with
an excellent system of order and discipline to regulate and give
a skilful direction to the energies and adventurous spirit of
the hero, and a wise selection of officers of superior talent to
command, whose presence inspires confidence,--have been the leading
causes of the splendid victories gained by the British arms.[5]
The fame of the deeds of the past and present generations in the
various battle fields where the robust sons of Albion have fought
and conquered, surrounds the British arms with a halo of glory;
these achievements will live in the page of history to the end of
time.

The records of the several regiments will be found to contain a
detail of facts of an interesting character, connected with the
hardships, sufferings, and gallant exploits of British soldiers in
the various parts of the world, where the calls of their Country
and the commands of their Sovereign have required them to proceed
in the execution of their duty, whether in active continental
operations, or in maintaining colonial territories in distant and
unfavourable climes.

The superiority of the British infantry has been pre-eminently set
forth in the wars of six centuries, and admitted by the greatest
commanders which Europe has produced. The formations and movements
of this _arme_, as at present practised, while they are adapted
to every species of warfare, and to all probable situations
and circumstances of service, are calculated to show forth the
brilliancy of military tactics calculated upon mathematical and
scientific principles. Although the movements and evolutions have
been copied from the continental armies, yet various improvements
have from time to time been introduced, to insure that simplicity
and celerity by which the superiority of the national military
character is maintained. The rank and influence which Great Britain
has attained among the nations of the world, have in a great
measure been purchased by the valour of the Army, and to persons
who have the welfare of their country at heart, the records of the
several regiments cannot fail to prove interesting.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] A company of 200 men would appear thus:--

__| | | |__| | 20 20 20 30 2|0 30 20 20 20 | Harquebuses. Muskets.
Halberds. Muskets. Harquebuses. Archers. Pikes. Pikes. Archers.

The musket carried a ball which weighed 1/10th of a pound; and the
harquebus a ball which weighed 1/25th of a pound.

[2] The 30th, 31st, and 32nd Regiments were formed as Marine corps
in 1702, and were employed as such during the wars in the reign
of Queen Anne. The Marine corps were embarked in the Fleet under
Admiral Sir George Rooke, and were at the taking of Gibraltar, and
in its subsequent defence in 1704; they were afterwards employed at
the siege of Barcelona in 1705.

[3] The brave Sir Roger Williams, in his Discourse on War, printed
in 1590, observes:--“I persuade myself ten thousand of our nation
would beat thirty thousand of theirs (the Spaniards) out of the
field, let them be chosen where they list.” Yet at this time the
Spanish infantry was allowed to be the best disciplined in Europe.
For instances of valour displayed by the British Infantry during
the Seventy Years’ War, see the Historical Record of the Third
Foot, or Buffs.

[4] _Vide_ the Historical Record of the First, or Royal Regiment of
Foot.

[5] “Under the blessing of Divine Providence, His Majesty ascribes
the successes which have attended the exertions of his troops in
Egypt to that determined bravery which is inherent in Britons; but
His Majesty desires it may be most solemnly and forcibly impressed
on the consideration of every part of the army, that it has been a
strict observance of order, discipline, and military system, which
has given the full energy to the native valour of the troops, and
has enabled them proudly to assert the superiority of the national
military character, in situations uncommonly arduous, and under
circumstances of peculiar difficulty.”--_General Orders in 1801._

In the General Orders issued by Lieut.-General Sir John Hope
(afterwards Lord Hopetoun), congratulating the army upon the
successful result of the Battle of Corunna, on the 16th of January,
1809, it is stated:--“On no occasion has the undaunted valour of
British troops ever been more manifest. At the termination of a
severe and harassing march, rendered necessary by the superiority
which the enemy had acquired, and which had materially impaired
the efficiency of the troops, many disadvantages were to be
encountered. These have all been surmounted by the conduct of the
troops themselves; and the enemy has been taught, that whatever
advantages of position or of numbers he may possess, there is
inherent in the British officers and soldiers a bravery that knows
not how to yield,--that no circumstances can appal,--and that will
ensure victory, when it is to be obtained by the exertion of any
human means.”




THE SEVENTIETH REGIMENT OF FOOT.




CONTENTS

OF THE

HISTORICAL RECORD.


  YEAR                                                          PAGE

        INTRODUCTION.                                             ix

  1758  Formation of the Regiment from the Second Battalion
          of the Thirty-first regiment                             1

  ----  Stationed in Scotland                                     --

  ----  Faced with _light grey_, and commonly called
          the _Glasgow Greys_                                     --

  ----  The colonelcy conferred on Lieut.-Colonel John
          Parslow, from the First Foot Guards                     --

  ----  Officers appointed to Commissions in the regiment          2

  1759  Removed to South Britain                                  --

  1760  Appointment of Lieut.-Colonel Cyrus Trapaud,
          from the Third regiment, to the colonelcy, in
          succession to Colonel Parslow, removed to the
          Fifty-fourth regiment                                   --

  1763  Embarked for Ireland                                      --

  1764  Embarked for the West Indies                              --

  1768  The _Facing_ directed by the Royal Warrant of
          the 19th of December to be _Black_                       3

  1774  Returned to England from the West Indies                  --

  1776  Proceeded to Scotland                                     --

  1778  Embarked for North America                                 3

  ----  Appointment of Major-General William Tryon
          to the colonelcy, in succession to Lieut.-General
          Trapaud, removed to the Fifty-second regiment           --

  1781  Stationed in Nova Scotia                                  --

  1782  Directed to assume the County title of “Surrey”
          regiment, in addition to its Numerical title            --

  1783  Appointment of Colonel the Earl of Suffolk to
          the colonelcy, in succession to Lieut.-General
          Tryon, removed to the Twenty-ninth regiment             --

  1784  Returned to England from North America                     4

  1787  Embarked for Ireland                                      --

  1793  Embarked for the West Indies                              --

  1794  Engaged in the capture of _Martinique_                    --

  1795  Returned to England                                        5

  ----  Embarked for Gibraltar                                     6

  1800  Embarked for the West Indies, where six companies
          arrived                                                 --

  ----  Four companies prevented from proceeding to the
          West Indies by the vessel having sprung a
          leak, and proceeded from Lisbon to Jersey               --

  1801  The six companies returned from the West
          Indies and joined the four companies at Jersey          --

  ----  The Regiment proceeded from Jersey to Dover               --

  1803  Embarked for the West Indies                              --

  1807  Detachment engaged in the capture of certain
          Danish West India Islands                               --

  1810  Flank companies formed part of an expedition
          against Guadaloupe                                       7

  ----  Capture of _Guadaloupe_                                   --

  1812  Returned from the West Indies                              8

  ----  Proceeded to Scotland                                     --

  ----  Received the Royal Authority to assume the title
          of the _Glasgow Lowland regiment_                       --

  1813  Engaged on duties at Montrose and Perth                    8

  ----  Embarked for Ireland                                      --

  ----  Embarked for Canada                                       --

  1814  Appointment of Lieut.-General Honorable Sir G. Lowry
          Cole, K.B., to the colonelcy, in succession to
          General the Earl of Suffolk, removed to the
          Forty-fourth regiment                                   --

  ----  Employed at Quebec, Montreal, Cornwall, and
          Kingston in Canada                                      --

  1816  Appointment of Lieut.-General Forbes Champagné
          to the colonelcy, in succession to Lieut.-General
          Sir G. Lowry Cole, removed to the Thirty-fourth
          regiment                                                 9

  ----  Appointment of Major-General Sir Kenneth
          Alexander Howard, K.C.B., afterwards Earl
          of Effingham, to the colonelcy, in succession
          to Lieut.-General Champagné, deceased                   --

  1825  Authorized to resume the County title of the
          Surrey regiment, and to discontinue the title
          of the Glasgow Lowland regiment                         --

  1826  Continued on duty at different stations in Canada         --

  1827  Embarked from Canada                                      10

  ----  Proceeded to Ireland                                      --

  1832  Appointment of Lieut.-General G. J. Hall to
          the colonelcy, in succession to Lieut.-General
          Lord Howard of Effingham                                --

  1834  Formed into six Service, and four Depôt companies,
          preparatory to embarkation for a foreign station        --

  ----  Service companies embarked from Cork for Gibraltar        --

  1835  Depôt companies embarked from Ireland for Guernsey        --

  1836  Service companies embarked from Gibraltar for Malta       --

  1838  Service companies embarked from Malta for the West
          Indies                                                  10

  ----  Depôt companies embarked from Guernsey for Ireland        --

  ----  The Royal Court of Guernsey passed an Act in
          order to record in a permanent manner their
          testimony of the good conduct and discipline
          of the officers, non-commissioned officers, and
          privates of the Seventieth regiment                     --

  1841  The Service companies embarked from the West Indies
          for Canada                                              12

  ----  Received the thanks of the Lieut.-General commanding
          in the West Indies                                      --

  1843  Embarked at Quebec for England                            13

  ----  Arrived at Portsmouth, and joined by the Depôt
          companies from Ireland                                  --

  ----  Proceeded to Manchester                                   --

  1845  Embarked for Ireland                                      --

  1847  Establishment augmented to 1000 rank and file             14

  1848  Ordered to be held in readiness to embark for the
          East Indies                                             --

        Conclusion                                                14


1849.




SUCCESSION OF COLONELS

OF

THE SEVENTIETH REGIMENT OF FOOT.


  YEAR       PAGE

  1758  John Parslow                                              15

  1760  Cyrus Trapaud                                             --

  1778  William Tryon                                             16

  1783  John Earl of Suffolk                                      17

  1814  Honorable Sir G. Lowry Cole, K.B.                         --

  1816  Forbes Champagné                                          18

  ----  Sir Kenneth Alexander Howard, G.C.B., afterwards
          the Earl of Effingham                                   19

  1832  Gage John Hall                                            21




PLATE.


  Colours and Costume of the Regiment         _to face Page_      14




HISTORICAL RECORD

OF

THE SEVENTIETH,

OR

THE SURREY REGIMENT OF FOOT.


[Sidenote: 1756]

The repose granted to Europe by the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle
was interrupted by the aggressions, made by the French, on the
British territory in America. War between the two kingdoms
speedily followed; and a considerable augmentation was made to the
strength of the British army in the winter of 1755, and in the
spring of 1756. On that occasion a second battalion was added to
the THIRTY-FIRST regiment, then commanded by Major-General Henry
Holmes, and stationed in Great Britain.

[Sidenote: 1758]

In 1758 the second battalion of the THIRTY-FIRST foot was
constituted a regiment, which was numbered the “SEVENTIETH” in the
British line. It was stationed in North Britain; its facings were
light grey; it contained in its ranks many men who were natives of
Scotland, particularly of Glasgow, and they were commonly called
the “GLASGOW GREYS.”

The colonelcy of the SEVENTIETH regiment was conferred on Colonel
John Parslow, from captain and lieut.-colonel in the first foot
guards; the lieut.-colonelcy on Charles Vignoles, from major in
the thirty-first regiment; and the majority on Robert Pigot,
senior captain of the thirty-first. The officers appointed to the
SEVENTIETH regiment were:--


_Colonel_ John Parslow.

  _Lieut.-Colonel_ Charles Vignoles.
  _Major_ Robert Pigot.


_Captains._

  William Piers.
  Hector Munro.
  Hon. Spencer Compton.
  D. Hamilton.
  George Grant.
  T. Grueber.
  William Nesbit.
  _Captain Lieut._ Jno. Fowle.


_Lieutenants._

  John Crofton.
  Rob. Clements.
  J. Dumarsque.
  A. Thompson.
  Anthony Morgan.
  William Tullock.
  John Stevens.
  M. Johnston.
  A. Lysaght.
  R. Bristow.
  H. Norman.
  Jas. Cusack.
  William Smith.
  Edward Hicks.
  Geo. Whichcot.
  Cha. Sutherland.
  U. Pendergrast.
  W. L. Hooker.


_Ensigns._

  Geo. Williamson.
  Cha. Gordon.
  Robert Wilson.
  Geo. Kinlock.
  Rob. Orrock.
  J. Rosenhagen.
  Rob. Jephson.
  Wm. Talbot.

  _Chaplain_, Tho. Parslow.
  _Surgeon_, Sam. Bright.
  _Adjutant_, W. L. Hooker.
  _Quarter-Master_, Geo. Williamson.


[Sidenote: 1759]

[Sidenote: 1760]

From Scotland the regiment was removed to South Britain, in 1759,
and remained there during the seven years’ war. Colonel Parslow was
removed to the fifty-fourth regiment, in September, 1760, and the
colonelcy of the SEVENTIETH was conferred on Lieut.-Colonel Cyrus
Trapaud, of the Third or Buffs.

[Sidenote: 1763]

Peace having been concluded, the establishment of the regiment was
reduced in 1763; at the same time it was removed to Ireland.

[Sidenote: 1764]

In 1764 the regiment embarked from Ireland for the West Indies,
where it was stationed ten years.

[Sidenote: 1768]

By the Royal Warrant of the 19th December, 1768, the facings were
directed to be _black_.

[Sidenote: 1774]

The regiment sustained severe loss from the climate of the West
India Islands during the period it was employed there; and in 1774
it returned to England much reduced in numbers.

[Sidenote: 1775]

[Sidenote: 1776]

During the year 1775 the regiment was employed recruiting its
numbers in England, and in 1776 it marched to Scotland.

[Sidenote: 1778]

The regiment was stationed in Scotland until the early part of the
year 1778, when it embarked for North America, and was employed
in that part of the British dominions during the remainder of the
American war, which commenced in 1775, and ended in 1782.

Lieut.-General Trapaud was removed in 1778 to the fifty-second
regiment, and was succeeded in the colonelcy of the SEVENTIETH by
Major-General William Tryon, from major in the first foot guards.

[Sidenote: 1779]

[Sidenote: 1780]

The battalion companies of the regiment were stationed in the
northern provinces of America; but the flank companies were
detached southward.

[Sidenote: 1781]

In 1781 the regiment was stationed in Nova Scotia, and it remained
in that country during the two following years.

[Sidenote: 1782]

In 1782, the SEVENTIETH was designated the SURREY regiment, county
titles being adopted at this period in the army, pursuant to His
Majesty’s command, with a view of promoting the recruiting service
by cultivating a connexion with distinct parts of the kingdom.

[Sidenote: 1783]

Lieut.-General Tryon was removed, in 1783, to the twenty-ninth
regiment, and King George III. appointed Colonel the Earl of
Suffolk, from the ninety-seventh (afterwards disbanded) to the
colonelcy of the SEVENTIETH regiment.

[Sidenote: 1784]

Having been relieved from duty in North America, the regiment
returned to England in 1784.

[Sidenote: 1785]

[Sidenote: 1786]

[Sidenote: 1787]

The regiment occupied various quarters in England during the years
1785 and 1786, and in 1787 it proceeded to Ireland.

[Sidenote: 1793]

While the regiment was stationed in Ireland, the French Revolution
involved Great Britain in war with France; and in 1793, the
SEVENTIETH regiment embarked from Ireland, under the command of
Colonel Eyre Coote, for the West Indies, to take part in an attack
on the French West India Islands.

[Sidenote: 1794]

An armament was assembled at Barbadoes in the beginning of 1794,
under the orders of General Sir Charles, afterwards Earl, Grey, for
the capture of _Martinique_, and the SEVENTIETH regiment had the
honor to take part in this enterprise. The grenadiers and light
infantry were formed in flank battalions, and Lieut.-Colonel Coote
commanded the first battalion of light infantry; the regiment was
commanded by Lieut.-Colonel Johnston. A landing was effected, at
three different points, on the island of Martinique on the 5th,
6th, and 8th of February; and the first light infantry, under
Lieut.-Colonel Coote of the SEVENTIETH, distinguished themselves
at the capture of the heights of Morne le Brun. The battalion
companies had also an opportunity of signalizing themselves. Sir
Charles Grey stated in his despatch,--“I received intelligence
of the enemy’s landing troops, and taking post on Morne Pied, to
cut off the communication between Brigadier-General Whyte and
head-quarters at Salée, and I ordered the SEVENTIETH regiment,
with two howitzers, to march on the same night and dislodge them,
which was executed with great spirit, and the post taken possession
of early on the morning of the 9th, under the good conduct of
Adjutant-General, Colonel Dundas, the SEVENTIETH regiment being
commanded by Lieut.-Colonel Johnston, and the enemy completely
defeated at the first charge.” The loss of the regiment on this
occasion was limited to a few private soldiers wounded.

After a series of brilliant successes, possession was gained of
the greater part of the island; Fort Bourbon and Fort Royal were
besieged, and the garrisons forced to surrender,--the French troops
in the former delivering up five stand of colours, and those in
the latter two. These colours were sent to England, and lodged in
St. Paul’s Cathedral by a party of life guards and foot guards on
the 17th of May. Thus the British flag waved a second time over
Martinique, the island having been captured by the English in
1762, but restored to France by the peace of Fontainebleau in the
following year.

In these successes of the British arms, in which the SEVENTIETH
regiment had the honor to share, the commander of the expedition
stated--“The spirit, unanimity, and perseverance of the navy and
army never were more conspicuous; nor has more cordial co-operation
ever been manifested between His Majesty’s naval and land forces.
In a word, the general and field officers, and the commanding
officers of corps, have set such an example of zeal, activity, and
animation in this service, which has been so laudably imitated by
all the officers and soldiers of this little army, that they merit
the greatest praise.”

[Sidenote: 1795]

Having sustained severe loss from the climate of the West Indies,
the SEVENTIETH regiment returned to Europe in May, 1795; it was
speedily recruited, and embarked for Gibraltar under the orders of
Lieut.-Colonel Coote.

[Sidenote: 1796]

[Sidenote: 1800]

The regiment performed garrison duty at Gibraltar until February,
1800, when it embarked for the West Indies; six companies,
commanded by Lieut.-Colonel Arthur Wolfe, arrived at their
destination, and were stationed at Trinidad. The vessel containing
four companies, under Lieut.-Colonel Nichol, sprung a leak at sea,
and put into Lisbon harbour, from whence they were ordered to
proceed to the island of Jersey.

[Sidenote: 1801]

The six companies, which had proceeded to the West Indies, arrived
at Jersey in May, 1801, and the regiment proceeded to Dover. It was
one of the regiments forming the army of observation at Shornecliff
camp under Major-General (afterwards Sir John) Moore.

[Sidenote: 1802]

[Sidenote: 1803]

[Sidenote: 1804]

[Sidenote: 1805]

Peace was concluded with France in 1802; but hostilities were
resumed in 1803, and in the autumn of the same year the regiment
again embarked for the West Indies, under Lieut.-Colonel Andrew
Ross. It arrived at its destination in December, and was stationed
at the island of Antigua during the years 1804 and 1805.

[Sidenote: 1806]

In June, 1806, the head-quarters were removed to St. Christopher,
leaving two companies at Antigua, under Lieut.-Colonel Lewis Grant,
for one month, and they afterwards joined the regiment.

[Sidenote: 1807]

The policy of the Court of Denmark having become favourable to the
interests of the French, that country became involved in war with
Great Britain, in 1807, and in December of that year a detachment
of the SEVENTIETH regiment, under Lieut.-Colonel Ross, embarked
from St. Christopher with the expedition, under General Henry
Bowyer, against the Danish islands of _St. Thomas_ and _St. John_,
which surrendered to the British arms without firing a shot. The
regiment followed the detachment soon afterwards, and was stationed
at the island of St. Thomas.

[Sidenote: 1808]

[Sidenote: 1809]

During the years 1808 and 1809 the regiment was stationed at the
island of St. Thomas and its dependencies.

[Sidenote: 1810]

In 1810 the flank companies of the regiment were selected to form
part of an expedition, under Lieut.-General Sir George Beckwith,
K.B., against the island of _Guadaloupe_, which had been restored
to the French at the peace of Amiens. The expedition arrived before
the island in January, 1810. The troops employed on this service
were formed into two divisions of two brigades in each: on the 30th
of January, Major-General (afterwards Sir Thomas) Hislop reported,
that the enemy having retained possession of the sea-batteries
commanding the anchorage in the Grande Aine, from which they
continued to fire on the British men of war, the Light Company
of the SEVENTIETH regiment was sent to dislodge them, which was
instantly effected, the party of the enemy escaping along shore.
The conquest of this important settlement was accomplished in nine
days; the Governor, Captain-General Ernouf, surrendering the colony
and its dependencies to the British arms, by articles dated the 6th
of February.

In June of the same year, the officers, non-commissioned officers,
and drummers of four companies proceeded to Europe, in order to
replace the casualties arising from a long course of colonial
service, and formed a recruiting depôt, which was established at
Ayr, in Scotland, under the orders of Colonel Andrew Ross. This
officer was placed on the Staff of the army in the following year,
and proceeded to Cadiz, from whence he was removed to Carthagena,
where he died of an illness brought on by fatigue and service: he
attained the rank of Major-General before his decease.

[Sidenote: 1811]

From Ayr the depôt was removed, in 1811, to Stirling Castle, under
Lieut.-Colonel Grant.

[Sidenote: 1812]

The regiment was relieved from duty in the West Indies in the
early part of 1812, and, returning to Europe, joined the depôt at
Stirling Castle, in April and June of that year.

On the 22nd of October, 1812, the Prince Regent, in the name and on
the behalf of His Majesty, was pleased to approve of the SEVENTIETH
being styled the GLASGOW LOWLAND REGIMENT.

[Sidenote: 1813]

From Stirling Castle the regiment marched in January, 1813, to
Montrose, to assist the magistrates in suppressing riots: in
February it proceeded to Perth, and performed duty over French
prisoners about four months.

In July the regiment proceeded to Ireland, where it only remained
a few days, before it received orders to embark for Canada, to
reinforce the British troops in that country in consequence of
the war between Great Britain and the United States. The regiment
embarked from Cork, on the 31st of August, under Major MacGregor,
and, arriving in Lower Canada in November, was stationed at Quebec.

[Sidenote: 1814]

Lieut.-General the Honorable Sir Galbraith Lowry Cole, K.B., was
appointed Colonel of the SEVENTIETH regiment, from the 103rd foot,
in January, 1814, in succession to General the Earl of Suffolk, who
was removed to the forty-fourth regiment.

After performing garrison duty at Quebec eight months, the regiment
proceeded to Montreal, from whence it was removed to Cornwall
in Upper Canada, and in August it was brigaded with the ninth,
sixteenth, and fifty-seventh, under Colonel Grant, on the line of
communication from Montreal to Kingston in Upper Canada.

[Sidenote: 1815]

Peace was concluded with the United States in 1815, and in June
of that year the SEVENTIETH regiment was ordered to proceed to
Kingston.

[Sidenote: 1816]

Lieut.-General Sir G. Lowry Cole was removed to the thirty-fourth
regiment in May, 1816, and was succeeded in the colonelcy
of the SEVENTIETH by Lieut.-General Forbes Champagné, from
colonel-commandant of a battalion of the Rifle Brigade.

During this year the regiment remained at Kingston, and
Lieut.-Colonel Thomas Evans, C.B., assumed the command in August.

Lieut.-General Champagné died in the autumn of the year 1816,
and the colonelcy of the regiment was conferred on Major-General
Sir Kenneth Alexander Howard, K.C.B., afterwards Lord Howard of
Effingham.

[Sidenote: 1817]

In April, 1817, the regiment was removed, under the command of
Colonel Grant, to Fort George, Drummond’s Island, Amherstburg, the
posts on the Niagara frontier, and York, now called Toronto.

[Sidenote: 1819]

[Sidenote: 1820]

The regiment was removed to Kingston, in June, 1819, and was
stationed at that place, under the command of Lieut.-Colonel
MacGregor; in November, 1820, Colonel Ottley arrived and assumed
the command of the regiment.

[Sidenote: 1821]

[Sidenote: 1822]

From Kingston the regiment was removed in May, 1821, to Quebec, and
in May, 1822, Colonel Ottley proceeded to Europe on leave, when the
command again devolved on Lieut.-Colonel MacGregor.

[Sidenote: 1823]

[Sidenote: 1824]

The regiment continued to occupy quarters in Canada during the
years 1823, 1824, 1825, and 1826.

[Sidenote: 1825]

[Sidenote: 1826]

In 1825 the SEVENTIETH was permitted to resume the County title of
the SURREY regiment, conferred upon it in 1782, and to discontinue
the title of the Glasgow Lowland regiment.

[Sidenote: 1827]

In the summer of 1827 the regiment was relieved from duty in
Canada, and returning to Europe, arrived in Ireland in September;
it was stationed in that country six years.

[Sidenote: 1832]

The Earl of Effingham was removed to the third foot in 1832, and
the colonelcy of the SEVENTIETH was conferred on Lieut.-General
Gage John Hall, from the ninety-ninth regiment.

[Sidenote: 1834]

After occupying various stations in Ireland until the spring of
1834, the regiment was divided into six service, and four depôt
companies. The service companies embarked at Cork in March and
April, for Gibraltar, where they were stationed two years.

[Sidenote: 1835]

In 1835, the depôt companies were removed from Ireland to South
Britain, and were afterwards stationed at the island of Guernsey.

[Sidenote: 1836]

On the 16th of June, 1836, the service companies embarked at
Gibraltar for Malta, where they landed on the 3rd of July.

[Sidenote: 1838]

The service companies remained at Malta until January, 1838, when
they embarked for the West Indies, and were stationed at Barbadoes.

In September of the same year the depôt companies returned to
Ireland. Previously to the depôt companies quitting Guernsey,
the following testimonial of the Royal Court of the Island was
presented to Major White, complimentary of that portion of the
regiment:--


        “_Court-house, Guernsey, 24th August, 1838._

  “SIR,--To mark their high sense of the very meritorious conduct
  of the depôt of the 70th regiment, under your command, the
  Royal Court have passed, and entered on the public records, an
  Act, which will convey to the latest posterity the grateful
  remembrance of the inhabitants, of the honorable bearing of the
  regiment since its arrival in this island. I have now the honor
  to enclose a copy of that Act, under the seal of the bailiwick,
  and to express the pleasure I feel in transmitting such a
  testimonial of the esteem and consideration of the Court for the
  regiment, knowing it to be so well merited.

  “It only remains for me, in conformity with that Act, and in the
  name of the Royal Court, to thank you, Major White, and, through
  you, the officers, non-commissioned officers, and privates of the
  70th regiment, for the uniform tenor of your and their conduct,
  as honorable to the regiment, and as conducive to the peace and
  harmony of the island. The good wishes of the inhabitants of
  Guernsey will accompany the 70th at all times and in all places.

        “I have the honor to be, Sir,
        “Your very obedient humble servant,
        “DANIEL DE LISLE BROCK,
        “Bailiff of Guernsey.

  “To Major White, commanding the depôt
    of the 70th regiment, in Guernsey, &c.”


  “_Island of Guernsey. The 23rd of August, 1838, before Daniel De
  Lisle Brock, esq., Bailiff; present, John Guille, James Cary,
  John Hubert, esqrs., Sir William Collings, knight, Hillary O.
  Carré, Peter Bonamy, Dobrée Thomas, William Gosselin, Thomas Le
  Retilley, and Harry Dobrée, esqrs., Jurats._

  “The Royal Court specially assembled, advised of the approaching
  departure of the depôt of the 70th regiment, deem it right to
  express how much they have been flattered and gratified by their
  honorable conduct during the time they have been in garrison in
  this island,--conduct so honorable, that a simple letter from
  the President would be inadequate to render the regiment the
  justice that is due, were it not accompanied by an authentic
  Act extracted from the insular archives. In consequence, the
  Court, after having heard the opinions of the Crown Lawyers, have
  unanimously framed the present Act, to record publicly their
  esteem and thanks to Major White, the officers, non-commissioned
  officers, and soldiers of the regiment, for their discipline,
  good order, and the manner in which they have contributed
  to maintain a good understanding between themselves and the
  inhabitants.

        “CHARLES LEFEBVRE,
            Her Majesty’s Greffier.”

“In testimony of the above, the seal of the bailiwick of the said
island of Guernsey is affixed to this present Act.

        “DANIEL DE LISLE BROCK,
            Bailiff of the island of Guernsey.

        “P. B. DOBRÉE,      }
        “THOMAS LE RETILLEY }  Jurats.”


[Sidenote: 1841]

From Barbadoes the service companies were removed, in May, 1841,
to Canada, and landed at Montreal in June. On their embarkation
for North America, Lieutenant-General Maister, commanding in the
West Indies, issued the following General Order, expressive of his
approbation of the appearance of the Regiment:--

  “The Lieutenant-General was much gratified with his Inspection of
  the SEVENTIETH regiment this morning (1st May, 1841) on board Her
  Majesty’s troop-ship Sapphire.

  “The appearance of the men on board, as well as of the two
  companies which the Lieutenant-General had an opportunity
  of seeing on shore previous to their embarkation, reflects
  much credit upon Major White, the officers, non-commissioned
  officers, and soldiers of the corps; and although the
  Lieutenant-General had not the opportunity of making his
  Inspection so minutely as he could have desired, he is most
  willing to believe, that, had he done so, it would have added to
  the satisfaction he has experienced.”


[Sidenote: 1842]

[Sidenote: 1843]

The service companies were stationed in Canada during the year
1842. In May, 1843, they embarked at Quebec for England, under
the command of Lieut.-Colonel Joseph Kelsall, in Her Majesty’s
troop-ship Resistance; and, landing at Portsmouth on the 24th of
June, were afterwards joined by the depôt companies from Ireland.
Previous to leaving Canada seventy-two men of the SEVENTIETH
volunteered for permanent service to other regiments stationed in
North America. The regiment was moved from Portsmouth, in September
following, to Manchester, from whence it marched to Leeds in
October, with detached companies to Bradford, Sheffield, Halifax,
Huddersfield, and Keighley.

[Sidenote: 1844]

Lieutenant-Colonel Joseph Kelsall retired on full pay on the 23rd
February, 1844, and was succeeded by Major Edward James White, who
was promoted to the rank of lieutenant-colonel.

In October, 1844, the regiment returned to Manchester, where it
remained till April following.

[Sidenote: 1845]

In April, 1845, the regiment proceeded to Ireland and was stationed
at Newry, from whence it marched in September to Dublin. On the
30th December, 1845, Lieut.-Colonel E. J. White retired on full
pay, and Major Thomas Reed was promoted to the lieutenant-colonelcy
of the regiment.

[Sidenote: 1846]

The regiment was removed from Dublin to Templemore in August, 1846.

[Sidenote: 1847]

On the 1st April, 1847, the regiment was augmented to an
establishment of 57 serjeants, 21 drummers, and one thousand rank
and file. Major William Matthew Bigge was promoted to the rank of
lieutenant-colonel on the 23rd April, 1847, on the retirement of
Lieut.-Colonel Reed.

[Sidenote: 1848]

Events in the East Indies having rendered reinforcements necessary,
the sixty-fourth, SEVENTIETH, and eighty-third regiments have
been selected for embarkation for India,--the SEVENTIETH being
ordered to proceed to the Bengal Presidency, where the regiment may
probably have an opportunity of distinguishing itself in a more
signal, though not less useful, manner than a long tour of Colonial
Service has afforded.

       *       *       *       *       *

The foregoing statement of the services of the SEVENTIETH regiment
shows the long, and unavoidable, detention of the corps on West
India service, and that such was the cause of its not having had
an opportunity of sharing in the splendid victories obtained by
other regiments which were engaged in the Continental wars:--While
the regiment was employed in an apparently inactive state on
Colonial duty, the Government, and the Commander-in-Chief, were
enabled to send other disposable regiments to combat the enemy in
the Peninsula, and on various expeditions in Europe; the conquered
Islands in the West Indies were consequently entrusted to a few
corps, of which the SEVENTIETH regiment was one, and on which full
reliance could be placed by the Sovereign, and by the Country.


1848.


[Illustration: SEVENTIETH REGIMENT (Colours and Costume)]




SUCCESSION OF COLONELS

OF THE

SEVENTIETH,

OR

THE SURREY REGIMENT OF FOOT.


JOHN PARSLOW,

_Appointed 28th April, 1758_.

JOHN PARSLOW was many years an officer in the First Regiment of
Foot Guards, in which corps he rose to the rank of captain and
lieut.-colonel on the 18th of May, 1747. In 1758 King George II.
conferred upon him the colonelcy of the SEVENTIETH regiment, from
which he was removed, in 1760, to the Fifty-fourth regiment. He
was promoted to the rank of major-general in 1761, to that of
lieut.-general in 1770, and of general in 1782. He was removed to
the Thirtieth regiment in April, 1770. He died at Bath on the 15th
of November, 1786.


CYRUS TRAPAUD,

_Appointed 10th July, 1760_.

CYRUS TRAPAUD, descended from a family of distinction in France,
was related to Marshal Turenne and other noblemen in that country:
his father was a Protestant, and was forced by persecution to seek
an asylum in England. Cyrus Trapaud entered the British army, and
was many years an officer in the Buffs. He accompanied his regiment
to the Netherlands in 1742, served at the battle of Dettingen
in 1743, and of Fontenoy in 1745. Returning to Great Britain
in the same year, he served, in 1746, at the battles of Falkirk
and Culloden. In 1747 he again proceeded to the Netherlands, and
served at the battle of Val. On the 3rd of February, 1750, he
was appointed lieut.-colonel of the Buffs, and commanded that
regiment in the expedition to the coast of France, in 1757. He
served at the attack of Martinique, and commanded a brigade at the
reduction of Guadaloupe in 1759. In 1760 he was rewarded with the
colonelcy of the SEVENTIETH regiment; he was promoted to the rank
of major-general in 1762, and to that of lieut.-general in 1772;
was removed to the Fifty-second regiment in 1778, and promoted
to the rank of general in 1783. He was conspicuous for courage,
and for the exact performance of every duty both of public and
private life, united with a kind and gentlemanly deportment, which
procured him the esteem of all who knew him. He lived to be the
senior general in the army, and dying on the 3rd of May, 1801, was
buried with military honors at Chelsea, many distinguished persons
attending his funeral.


WILLIAM TRYON,

_Appointed 14th May, 1778_.

This Officer served many years in the First Foot Guards, in which
corps he was promoted to the rank of captain and lieut.-colonel
in 1758; in May, 1772, he was advanced to the rank of colonel,
and in 1776 he was nominated major in his regiment. He was
appointed governor of the state of North Carolina, where he
evinced great zeal and ability in suppressing the rising seeds of
insurrection, and he conciliated the loyal British subjects. Being
afterwards called to the government of New York, his abilities
were conspicuously displayed there during the American War of
Independence. He raised a body of Provincials for the King’s
service, and evinced gallantry in several military services,
particularly in the expedition to Danbury in the spring of 1777.
He was promoted to the rank of major-general in the same year, and
to that of lieut.-general in 1782. In 1778 he was rewarded with
the colonelcy of the SEVENTIETH regiment, and was removed to the
Twenty-ninth in 1783. He died in 1788.


JOHN, EARL OF SUFFOLK,

_Appointed 16th August, 1783_.

JOHN HOWARD was page to His Royal Highness the Duke of Cumberland,
and entered the army as ensign in the First Foot Guards, on the
13th of June, 1756; he was promoted to the rank of captain and
lieut.-colonel in 1773. In 1782 he was nominated colonel of the
Ninety-seventh regiment, afterwards disbanded; he succeeded to
the dignity of EARL OF SUFFOLK in 1783, and was removed to the
SEVENTIETH regiment in the same year. He was promoted to the rank
of major-general in 1787, to that of lieut.-general in 1797, and
of general in 1802. In 1814 he was removed to the Forty-fourth
regiment. He was many years governor of Londonderry and of Calmore
fort. His Lordship died in 1820.


THE HONORABLE SIR GALBRAITH LOWRY COLE, K.B.,

_Appointed 12th January, 1814_.

THE HONORABLE GALBRAITH LOWRY COLE entered the army in March, 1787,
and after serving in the subordinate commissions, was advanced
to the rank of major in 1793, when the struggle between Great
Britain and the revolutionists of France had commenced; and the
progress of the eventful contest which followed, afforded him
opportunities for the display of those professional abilities
which he possessed. In 1794 he was appointed lieut.-colonel in
Ward’s regiment, afterwards disbanded; and in 1799 he was nominated
lieut.-colonel in General Villette’s corps, afterwards disbanded;
in 1801 he obtained the rank of colonel. He served in the island
of Sicily, as brigadier-general, and commanded the first brigade
at the battle of Maida on the 4th of July, 1806; Major-General Sir
John Stuart, afterwards Count of Maida, bore testimony, in his
public despatch, to the gallant conduct of Brigadier-General the
Hon. G. L. Cole on that occasion, which reflected lustre on the
British arms. In 1808 he was promoted to the rank of major-general.
His services were afterwards extended to the Peninsula, where
he commanded a division during the campaigns from 1810 to the
overthrow of Napoleon, Emperor of France, and the restoration of
the Bourbon dynasty in 1814. His distinguished services during
those campaigns are blended with the military annals of the
Peninsula, and the public despatches of the Duke of Wellington
bear testimony of his excellent conduct during many difficult
operations, severely contested battles, and sieges. He received the
local rank of lieut.-general in Spain and Portugal in 1810; was
appointed colonel of the 103rd regiment in 1812; and obtained the
rank of lieut.-general in 1813. He was nominated a Knight of the
most Honorable Military Order of the Bath, and on the extension of
that order, in 1815, he received the decorations of Knight Grand
Cross of the Bath. In commemoration of his distinguished services
in Sicily, Portugal, Spain, and the South of France, he received
the distinction of a cross and four clasps, for the battles of
Maida, Albuhera, Salamanca, Vittoria, Pyrenees, Nivelle, Orthes,
and Toulouse. In 1814 he was removed to the SEVENTIETH regiment;
in 1816 to the Thirty-fourth; and in 1826 to the Twenty-seventh
regiment. He was appointed governor of Gravesend and Tilbury Fort;
and in 1830 promoted to the rank of general. He died in 1842.


FORBES CHAMPAGNÉ,

_Appointed 21st May, 1816_.

This officer was appointed ensign in the Fourth foot in 1773; he
was stationed at Boston when the American war commenced, and was
engaged at Lexington on the 19th of April, 1775. He was promoted to
the rank of lieutenant in the same year, and attached to the first
light battalion, with which he served in 1776, at the descent on
Long Island, battle of Brooklyn, capture of New York, action at
Frog’s Neck, capture of Fort Washington, and capture of New Jersey.
In 1777 he served in the expedition to Pennsylvania, and was at the
battles of Brandywine and Germantown: and in the march through the
Jerseys, in 1778, he was engaged at Freehold. He was promoted to
captain in the Twenty-third regiment in 1779, and was removed to
the mounted light infantry in 1780. He served in the expedition to
South Carolina, was at the siege of Charleston, at the battles of
Camden, and Guildford Court-house, and in all the actions in which
the troops under Major-General the Earl Cornwallis were engaged, in
the two Carolinas and in Virginia, ending with the capitulation of
York Town. He returned to England at the end of the war. In 1793 he
was appointed major, and afterwards lieut.-colonel of the Eightieth
regiment, with which corps he served in the Netherlands at the
siege of Nimeguen, and during the winter campaign of 1794-5 in
Holland. In 1795 he was removed to the Twentieth foot, and in 1797
was promoted to the rank of colonel. He served as brigadier-general
in Ireland, during the rebellion in 1798, and in 1799 in the
expedition to Holland. In 1800 he was placed on the staff of the
south-west district; and was promoted to the rank of major-general
in 1803. In 1806 he was nominated to the command of the western
district, and to the colonelcy of the Eighth Garrison Battalion.
In May, 1807, he was placed on the staff in the East Indies,
where he served some time. He was appointed colonel-commandant of
a battalion of the Rifle Brigade in 1809,--promoted to the rank
of lieut.-general in 1810, and removed to the colonelcy of the
SEVENTIETH regiment, in May, 1816. He died on the 22nd of October,
1816.


SIR KENNETH ALEXANDER HOWARD, G.C.B.,

afterwards

LORD HOWARD, EARL OF EFFINGHAM,

_Appointed 24th October, 1816_.

This officer entered the army, as ensign in the second (Coldstream)
foot guards, on the 21st April, 1786, and on the 25th February,
1793, embarked for Flanders, and served during the campaign in
that country; on the 25th April, 1793, he obtained a lieutenancy,
and on the 1st September the adjutancy. He continued to serve with
his regiment on the Continent till May, 1795, when the troops
returned to England. He was wounded at the battle of St. Amand;
and was present at the siege and capture of Valenciennes, action
of Lincelles, and siege of Dunkirk. On the 30th of December, 1797,
he was promoted to a captain-lieutenancy; and to a company on the
25th of July, 1799. On the 13th of June, 1793, he was appointed
major of brigade to the foot guards sent to Ireland, where he
served during the whole of the rebellion. In August, 1799, he
served in the same capacity with the expedition to Holland, and
was present in all the actions. On the 1st of July, 1801, he
was deputed to act as inspector-general of foreign corps during
the absence from England of Colonel W. Clinton; and on that
officer’s return he was appointed on the 25th of February, 1802,
deputy inspector-general of foreign corps; on that office being
abolished, he was nominated commandant of the foreign depôt. On
the 1st of January, 1805, he was appointed Aide-de-Camp to the
King, and received the rank of colonel; on the 4th of August,
1808, second major in his regiment; and on the 25th of July, 1810,
major-general. He joined the army in the Peninsula on the 9th of
January, 1811, and was appointed to the command of a brigade in the
first division, and was present with it at the action at Fuentes
d’Onor on the 5th of May; he was afterwards transferred with his
brigade to the second division, the command of which he held, as
senior officer, from July, 1811, to April, 1812; he commanded the
right column at the action of Arroyo dos Molinos; stormed and took
with part of his brigade the forts Napoleon and Ragusa at Almaraz.
In November, 1812, he was appointed to the command of the first
brigade of foot guards in the first division, and in June, 1813,
to the command of the division, which he held until the end of the
Peninsular war in 1814, being present at the battle of Vittoria,
attack on Tolosa, passage of the Bidassoa, Nivelle, Nive, and
Adour; investment of Bayonne, and repulse of the sortie, besides
various minor actions. Major-General Howard received a medal and
one clasp for Vittoria and Nive. He was subsequently appointed
Lieutenant-Governor of Portsmouth,--a Knight Companion of the
Most Honorable Military Order of the Bath,--and, on the 24th of
October, 1816, he was appointed by the Prince Regent, in the name,
and on the behalf, of His Majesty King George III., Colonel of
the SEVENTIETH regiment. He succeeded Richard, the late Earl of
Effingham, in the Barony, when the earldom became extinct, on the
11th of December, 1816. On the 12th of August, 1819, Lord Howard
of Effingham was advanced to the rank of lieut.-general, and on
the 17th of March, 1820, was nominated a Knight Grand Cross of
the Order of the Bath. On the 30th of January, 1832, his Lordship
was removed from the SEVENTIETH regiment to the Third foot, or
the Buffs. On the 10th of January, 1837, his Lordship was further
advanced to the rank of general, and on the 21st of that month was
created, by His Majesty King William IV., Earl of Effingham.

His Lordship’s decease occurred at Brighton on the 13th February,
1845.


GAGE JOHN HALL,

_Appointed 30th January, 1832_.




  LONDON: PRINTED BY W. CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET,
  FOR HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE.




  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  Except for those changes noted below, all misspellings in the text,
  and inconsistent or archaic usage, have been retained.

  Pg xxiii: (ToC) added page number ‘ix’ to INTRODUCTION entry.
  Pg 6: ‘Great Britian’ replaced by ‘Great Britain’.


*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORICAL RECORD OF THE SEVENTIETH,
OR, THE SURREY REGIMENT OF FOOT :  CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF THE FORMATION
OF THE REGIMENT IN 1758, AND OF ITS  SUBSEQUENT SERVICES TO 1848 ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
